===PAGE 2===
This page intentionally left blank 


===PAGE 3===

The Anti-Inflammation Diet and
Recipe Book
About the Author
Dr. Jessica Black graduated cum laude from Cardinal Stritch University
in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1998. She received her medical degree
from the National College of Naturopathic Medicine, in Portland, Ore-
gon, in 2002. Dr. Black now lives in McMinnville, Oregon, where she
cofounded A Family Healing Center with her husband, Dr. Jason Black.
They have one beautiful daughter, Sadie Rae. Apart from her work as
a naturopathic physician, Dr. Black enjoys hiking, biking, skiing, and
eating good food in the company of friends and family.


===PAGE 4===
DEDICATION

This book is dedicated to my beautiful
daughter, Sadie Rae Black.
Sadie,
Thank you for teaching me patience, the value
of playing, and how to love unconditionally.
Ordering
Trade bookstores in the U.S. and Canada please contact:
Publishers Group West
1700 Fourth Street, Berkeley CA 94710
Phone: (800) 788-3123
Fax: (800) 351-5073
Hunter House books are available at bulk discounts for textbook course adop-
tions; to qualifying community, health-care, and government organizations; and
for special promotions and fund-raising. For details please contact:
Special Sales Department
Hunter House Inc., PO Box 2914, Alameda CA 94501-0914
Phone: (510) 865-5282
Fax: (510) 865-4295
E-mail: ordering@hunterhouse.com
Individuals can order our books from most bookstores, by calling 
(800) 266-5592, or from our website at www.hunterhouse.com


===PAGE 5===
The
Anti-Inflammation 
Diet and Recipe 
Book
Protect Yourself and Your Family
from Heart Disease, Arthritis,
Diabetes, Allergies — and More
Jessica K. Black, N.D.


===PAGE 6===
Copyright © 2006 by Jessica K. Black, N.D.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying
and recording, or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system
without the written permission of the copyright owner and the publisher of this
book. Brief quotations may be used in reviews prepared for inclusion in a maga-
zine, newspaper, or for broadcast. For further information please contact:
Hunter House Inc., Publishers
PO Box 2914
Alameda CA 94501-0914
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Black, Jessica.
The anti-inflammation diet and recipe book : protect yourself and your
family from heart disease, arthritis, diabetes, allergies-and more / Jessica Black.
— 1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-89793-485-5
ISBN-10: 0-89793-485-7
1.  Inflammation—Diet therapy—Recipes.  I. Title.
RB131.B58 2006
641.5’6318—dc22
2006020190
Project Credits
Cover Design: Brian Dittmar Graphic Design
Book Production: Hunter House, Blair Cavagrotti
Developmental and Copy Editor: Kelley Blewster
Proofreader: Herman Leung
Indexers: Robert and Cynthia Swanson
Acquisitions Editor: Jeanne Brondino
Interns: Blair Cavagrotti, Faith Merino
Editor: Alexandra Mummery
Customer Service Manager: Christina Sverdrup
Order Fulfillment: Washul Lakdhon
Administrator: Theresa Nelson
Computer Support: Peter Eichelberger
Publisher: Kiran S. Rana
Printed and Bound by Bang Printing, Brainerd, Minnesota
Manufactured in the United States of America
9  8  7  6  5
First Edition
08  09  10  11 12


===PAGE 7===

Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xi
Why an Anti-Inflammation Diet?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Chapter 1: Modern Health Paradigms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
The Role of Primary Care
What Is Naturopathic Medicine?
How Disease Begins
The Flaw in Germ Theory
The Health of Our Children Equals the Health of Our Future
What Do We Mean by “Anti-Inflammation Diet”?
Chapter 2: Inflammation: What’s the Big Deal?  . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
What Is Inflammation?
Inflammation and Chronic Disease
Stress and Inflammation
The Harm in Chronic Use of Anti-Inflammatory Medication
Chapter 3: The Importance of Diet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Mitigating the Effects of Toxic Overload
You Really Are What You Eat
Food Allergies, Food Intolerances, and Inflammation
Certain Foods That Contribute to Inflammation
Symptoms of Food Allergies
Other Common Food Allergies
Chapter 4: The Anti-Inflammation Diet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
The Building Blocks
Eat More of These Foods
Lifestyle Choices


===PAGE 8===
Mealtime Recommendations
A Few More Suggestions
Chapter 5: How to Use This Book  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Converting Yourself and Your Family
Be Prepared
Modifying Recipes
Helpful Items to Have in the Kitchen
Sample Menus
Recipes* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads  . . . . . . .
56
Breads, Muffins, and Tortillas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Breakfasts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Teas and Other Beverages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Entrées  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
Grains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
Salads  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
Soups  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 190
Sweet Things  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
Appendix: Substitutions Chart  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 226
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 228
Online Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 232
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
*detailed recipe listings for each section are given on these pages
vi
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 9===
Foreword
One’s individual choice of foods for themselves and their families has
a great deal of effect on day-to-day health, as well as on prevention of
chronic health problems. This is well recognized and documented in
today’s scientific world.
Many years ago, in my work with patients, it became evident to
me that most people ate on a daily basis foods that were not good for
them. When they made dietary changes and no longer ate food aller-
gens or foods to which they were sensitive, they invariably began to feel
better. Through years of experience and with the help of nutritional sci-
ence, I was able to devise diets that helped most patients. From this
evolved the anti-inflammatory diet recommendations.
When people need to change their diets, the most common ques-
tion is always, “Well, then, what do I eat?” Fifteen years ago it was
almost impossible to find acceptable substitutes for many of the com-
mon food allergens or foods that have been shown to cause chronic
inflammation. Recipe books contained many of the foods that I was
recommending people avoid, so they were forced to just try on their
own to make substitutions and then hope the recipe “turned out to be
edible.”
Dr. Black took it upon herself to come up with delicious recipes
that require no (or few) substitutions. Just follow the recipe and, voilà,
a masterpiece. The tried and proven dishes you are about to discover
will delight any discriminating palate. Jessica’s work at preparing and
testing the recipes on friends and relatives has resulted in a must-have
cookbook. As a bonus, her recipes include nutritional information
about the content of fats/oils, protein, and carbohydrates, as well as
other vital nutrients.
vii



===PAGE 10===
More than just a cookbook, this text is a guide to help you learn
how to cook healthfully and to appreciate the tastes of healthy eating.
This book will simplify your work in the kitchen. Jessica has recipes for
everything from breakfast items to appetizers, side dishes, salads, soups,
main courses, and desserts. All these tasty recipes meet the criteria of
low-allergen, anti-inflammatory food choices. Changing one’s diet,
preparing healthy meals, and enjoying nutritious foods were never so
easy.
Over time you will want to try all the recipes offered in this book.
You will have your favorites, but as your palate expands so will your
level of health and wellness. Jessica shows that healthy eating need not
be time consuming. Quick and efficient—yet nutritionally sound—
meal preparation can now be a reality for everyone. You can prepare
these meals after a long workday and be extremely satisfied.
Dr. Black has done an incredible job of creating a book that will
enhance your eating pleasure. Give yourself and your family the great-
est pleasure you can at mealtime by eating healthy foods and follow-
ing the recipes outlined in this book.
Happy eating.
— Dick Thom, D.D.S., N.D.
Portland, Oregon
viii
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 11===
Preface
I truly loved preparing the food for this cookbook. Because I love cook-
ing and love keeping myself and my family healthy, writing this book
became a necessity so others could get the same satisfaction from cook-
ing that I do. My husband and I are strong proponents of living healthy
lifestyles, and we strive to impart our philosophy to as many people as
we can. We figure if we can educate others, they in turn can educate
the next group of people, and through the wonders of small talk we
can create a collectively healthier population.
Have you ever noticed that when you are in a good mood and feel-
ing fine, the people around you seem to catch on to that energy and
good things just begin to happen? And, similarly, have you noticed that
when you are not feeling well or are feeling a little angry or grouchy,
people around you can sense that energy and in turn begin to feel or
act negatively as well? If we allow ourselves to live day in and day out
not feeling well, we and the people around us suffer, including our fam-
ily members and children. Conversely, if we begin to take charge of our
health through proper diet, exercise, and positive thought, our well-
being and the well-being of all the people around us seem to improve.
Paying attention to our health and using natural medicine is a great
new trend in our society. It is easy to get excited about health as you
begin this diet, because everyone who follows it sees some positive
change. The diet was developed with the idea of reducing overall
inflammation in order for the body to work more efficiently. (Why
should we focus on reducing inflammation? For an answer to that
question, see Chapter 2.) As naturopathic physicians, I and many of my
colleagues recommend this particular diet to every patient. I have seen
arthritis patients reduce their pain by 50 percent (or more), people with
ix



===PAGE 12===
allergies become allergy free, and sufferers of chronic diseases receive
hope—all from the health improvements these patients notice upon
beginning this diet. In addition to improving health in general, the anti-
inflammation diet allows the treatments people follow to work better
because overall metabolism and bodily function have improved.
What prompted this recipe book was the need of all my patients to
determine what to eat once I had suggested a new diet for them. Tran-
sitions are tough, but they seem to be even more difficult when people
don’t know how to change or what to eat to facilitate the change. I kept
one food-allergy cookbook in my office that I found myself lending to
my patients, with frustration that I didn’t have twenty more copies to
go around. At each visit I offered my patients more and more dietary
suggestions. Finally I decided to write them all down in an easy-to-use
and inspiring cookbook.
Part One of the book lays the foundation by explaining the con-
cepts behind holistic health and naturopathic medicine, the importance
of reducing systemic inflammation, and the basics about the anti-
inflammation diet. Part Two contains the recipes. Each recipe offers a
relevant tidbit of health information. Most recipes also offer ingredient
substitutions to help you as you experiment in your kitchen.
Congratulations on your choice to begin a new, healthier way of
eating. At times, making the transition may be difficult, but remember
that you are affecting more than just yourself; by following the anti-
inflammation diet you are contributing to a healthier world. Let this
book be a blessing to all who use it, let it inspire new ideas, and let it
guide you on the path toward vibrant health.
x
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 13===
Acknowledgments
First I must offer my gratitude to my husband, Jason Black, N.D. With-
out his input, I might have included some recipes in this book that may
not have been to anyone’s liking. I give all my love to you, Jason, for
always inspiring me to try something new, for truly teaching me to love
food, and for sharing my passion for preparing the most elegantly beau-
tiful life-giving foods. Thank you for continually challenging me to
become a better healer and better person.
I want to thank many of my colleagues for creatively showing up
at potlucks with dishes I had never dreamed of. It is so hard to name
them all, but when I think of unique dishes, I seem to think of Matt
Fisel, N.D., Chelsea Hunton, MSOM, Erika Siegel, N.D., L.Ac., Heidi
Lescanec, N.D., Kristen Lum, N.D., and many others. Words cannot
describe what an incredible experience medical school was because I
was surrounded by so many talented, intelligent, spiritually gifted, and
zealous individuals.
I want to thank Debra Passman, N.D., for showing me how to love
and crave sushi outings, and Sarah Vlach, M.D., and Mark Holbrook
for the entertaining sushi-rolling nights essential to keeping my love
for sushi alive. I especially want to thank Wendy Abraham, N.D., for
always being the best friend and colleague anyone could ever have or
want. Special thanks also go to my good friend Stephanie Findley, who
has diligently accepted the anti-inflammatory diet into her household
and has tested many of the recipes in this book for me.
Special thanks close to my heart go to my family for being sup-
portive as I trudged through an unconventional school to receive an
unconventional degree to learn an unconventional way to cook and
live. I appreciate my family for embracing and respecting my profes-
xi



===PAGE 14===
sion as much as I have grown to love and respect all of my naturopathic
mentors and colleagues.
Last, but not least, I thank Dickson Thom, D.D.S., N.D., for teach-
ing me the true way of healing and for willingly sharing his incredible
knowledge of nature cure. Thank you for introducing me to the anti-
inflammatory diet and to the profound results it can have on health and
vitality.
Important Note
The material in this book is intended to provide a review of infor-
mation regarding an anti-inflammation diet. Every effort has been
made to provide accurate and dependable information. The con-
tents of this book have been compiled through professional
research and in consultation with medical and health profession-
als. However, health-care professionals have differing opinions,
and advances in medical and scientific research are made very
quickly, so some of the information may become outdated.
Therefore, the publisher, author, and editors, as well as the
professionals quoted in the book, cannot be held responsible for
any error, omission, or dated material. The author and publisher
assume no responsibility for any outcome of applying the infor-
mation in this book in a program of self-care or under the care of
a licensed practitioner. If you have questions concerning your
nutrition or diet, or about the application of the information
described in this book, consult a qualified health-care professional. 
xii
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 15===
Why an Anti-
Inflammation Diet?


===PAGE 16===
CHAPTER 1
Modern 
Health Paradigms
The art of healing comes from nature, not from the physician.
Therefore, the physician must start from nature, with an open mind.
— Paracelsus
The current American lifestyle causes a large amount of concern among
people who care about health. There has been a dramatic increase in
noncommunicable diseases within the last decade, and that number is
still rising. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion (CDC), seven out of every ten deaths are attributed to chronic dis-
eases such as cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease (e.g., heart
attack and stroke), all of which have a direct nutritional connection.
Right now at least two paradigms of healing exist in our society.
One paradigm, which centers around diagnosing and treating disease,
takes a mechanistic approach to illness in which the patient’s symptoms
are combated with pharmaceuticals and/or surgery. This approach
assumes that if the patient’s symptoms improve via painkillers, antibi-
otics, steroids, or other suppressive treatments, then the patient is cured.
A second paradigm, the one embraced by naturopathic medicine,
looks at a person as a whole and acts to stimulate his or her healing,
even before disease is apparent. This paradigm, of which prevention is
the cornerstone, strives to maintain homeostasis within the body, allow-
ing it to function optimally and thereby promoting improved health.
Disease symptoms function as messengers to tell us what is going on in
the body and can direct the practitioner to treat certain systems to bring
about better health. Disease merely indicates the existence of a “dis-
ease” in the body—that is, an imbalance. When symptoms appear, they
2



===PAGE 17===
are only the tip of the proverbial iceberg that for some time has been
developing beneath the surface. This paradigm approaches symptoms
as indicators of something going on deeper in the body; rather than
merely suppressing the symptom, it strives to find and remove its true
cause.
The Role of Primary Care
In recent years the federal government has stated that primary care is
the ideal setting in which to provide nutritional education to the pub-
lic. However, according to an article published in Family Practice in
2000, many primary-care doctors are reluctant to educate patients due
to their disbelief that dietary intervention can be a worthwhile modal-
ity, despite the fact that numerous studies exist showing positive dietary
influences on health outcomes. For example, a randomized, controlled
trial published in July 2003 by the Journal of the American Medical
Association found that adding soy protein, viscous fiber, and nuts can
be as effective for lowering cholesterol as adding a prescription statin
medication to a low–saturated fat diet.
Another article published in the New England Journal of Medicine
in 2002 stated that diet and exercise may be more effective than phar-
macologic therapy at defending against cardiovascular diseases in
patients with impaired glucose tolerance. After three years of making
diet and lifestyle changes, patients decreased their risk of developing
diabetes by 58 percent. In contrast, participants who were only taking
metformin, a common pharmaceutical prescription for diabetics,
reduced their diabetes risk by only 31 percent. This is a significant dif-
ference. In addition, participants following the lifestyle changes had a
significant reduction in C-reactive protein (CRP), which is an indirect
marker of subclinical inflammation. (Subclinical inflammation is inflam-
mation that can’t be detected through the usual diagnostic procedures.
The role of inflammation in health is the topic of the next chapter.) Met-
formin participants affected their CRP levels significantly less than
lifestyle-change participants. These findings are huge breakthroughs for
diabetic patients—if they get the information.
Naturopathic physicians are recognized primary-care physicians.
In states where they are licensed to do so, they provide lifestyle and diet-
Modern Health Paradigms
3


===PAGE 18===
modification education in a primary-care setting and actively teach
prevention strategies. Naturopathic physicians offer dietary interven-
tion because they believe in it completely. Many naturopathic physi-
cians have seen their patients experience significant health improve-
ments through diet, lifestyle change, and various other naturopathic
modalities.
As a naturopathic physician, it is my duty and goal to educate my
patients about how to change their health by changing their lifestyles.
I help to put the power of healing into their own hands. The body has
the innate wisdom to heal itself; sometimes it just needs a reminder to
stimulate its own healing. We like to say that everyone has her or his
own inner doctor. A few wise choices in lifestyle habits can change one’s
quality of life immensely. We just need to take better care of our ves-
sels, and they can do amazing things on their own.
What Is Naturopathic Medicine?
A licensed naturopathic physician (N.D.) attends a four-year, graduate-
level naturopathic medical school and is educated in all of the same
basic sciences as a medical doctor (M.D.), with the difference that he
or she also studies holistic and nontoxic approaches to healing, with a
strong emphasis on disease prevention and optimizing wellness. A
naturopathic physician is board-certified by his or her state and is
expected to uphold the highest standards of primary medical care. Cur-
rently, fourteen states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories
of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands license naturopathic physi-
cians to practice primary care. When searching for a naturopathic
physician in states that do not have licensing procedures, it is impor-
tant to find out about his or her credentials. Make sure you are being
treated by a properly trained physician who has attended a four-year,
accredited, postgraduate naturopathic medical school. There are cur-
rently four such schools in the United States and one in Canada. For
more information on finding a naturopathic physician in your area, you
can contact the American Association of Naturopathic Physicians or
Canadian Association of Naturopathic Doctors (see Online Resources,
in the back of the book).
4
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 19===
Naturopathic medicine is successful at treating various acute and
chronic diseases. It excels in treating chronic illness when allopathic
medicine has nothing left to offer. In acute conditions, it often supports
the body’s own natural healing mechanism. Some common conditions
treated by naturopathic medicine include, but are not limited to, aller-
gies, asthma, anxiety, depression, fatigue, digestive complaints, skin
complaints, autoimmune diseases, thyroid problems, menstrual irregu-
larities (including menopause symptoms), acute colds and flus, chronic
infections, and cancer.
Services offered at a naturopathic clinic vary depending on the
physician but may include acute care; women’s medicine; I.V. therapy
including chelation (an intravenous injection of ethylene-diamine-
tetra-acetic acid, EDTA, an amino acid that eliminates heavy metals
and other elements from the body and that has been used to improve
metabolic function and blood flow through blocked arteries); wellness;
pediatrics; physical medicine and spinal manipulation; nutritional coun-
seling; homeopathy; drainage (a specific form of cellular-level detoxifi-
cation); and botanical medicine, with a focus on chronic disease and
cancer support.
Naturopathic medicine is no secret. As naturopathic physicians we
seek to help the body begin to restore health and maintain homeosta-
sis. We pay attention to all aspects of the patient’s body, mind, and spirit
to ensure balance in all of these areas. Often, simple dietary recom-
mendations or a few lifestyle changes begin to turn the body around.
At other times we need to help the body direct itself in a certain way
by supporting specific systems with vitamins, minerals, botanicals,
homeopathy, or other natural medicines.
The underlying principles of naturopathy that help so many indi-
viduals achieve optimal health are listed below:
 First, do no harm.
 Identify and treat the cause.
 Impart the healing power of nature.
 The doctor is teacher.
 Always treat the whole person.
 Emphasize prevention.
Modern Health Paradigms
5


===PAGE 20===
If everyone were to live by these principles, rates of illness and pre-
mature death would decrease significantly.
How Disease Begins
When the body is able to stay in balance and avoid being subjected to
any “dis-ease,” then it stays healthy. When something happens to dis-
rupt the body’s equilibrium, or homeostasis, it becomes more suscep-
tible to disease. Many physiological and psychological factors affect the
balance within the body and therefore affect the body’s susceptibility
to disease.
According to Henry Lindlahr, M.D., from the book Philosophy of
Natural Therapeutics, “One of the primary causes of disease is an
abnormal composition of blood and lymph.” Blood and lymph are
responsible for transporting nutrients to the tissues, essentially feeding
their functions, and for carrying away wastes, toxins, and metabolic
byproducts to be excreted from the body via the liver and kidneys. The
composition of these fluids is solely dependent upon what type of
lifestyle practices we follow and what type of nutrients we bring into
the body via diet to fuel the vital body processes.
It follows, then, that diseases are often the result of nutrient defi-
ciency, resulting in the delivery by the blood and lymph of less than ade-
quate amounts of nutrients to fuel cell metabolism. This in turn is the
result of an inadequate, unbalanced, or polluted diet. According to
Lindlahr, if the diet consists of an excess of low-quality proteins, car-
bohydrates, and fats, tissues will inevitably be clogged with “morbid
matter.” This “morbid matter,” or toxin accumulation, can interfere
with vital cellular functions, thereby becoming pathogenic to many sys-
tems in the body. The buildup of toxins in turn supports cellular degen-
eration, moving the system toward disease, rather than supporting the
cellular regeneration needed for healing.
Depending on the constitution of the individual and on his or her
ability to eliminate accumulated wastes, diseases can manifest in many
different forms. One individual may experience skin rashes, allergies,
and asthma, whereas another, who is less efficient at eliminating wastes,
may store waste products in the form of cysts, growths, and eventually
6
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 21===
cancer. Only when the body is properly balanced can it function opti-
mally, including adequately removing wastes.
The Flaw in Germ Theory
Louis Pasteur is responsible for bringing our awareness to the fact that
certain microorganisms cause certain diseases. This is the Pasteurian
germ theory of disease. For example, Pasteur noticed that diphtheria
bacillus is found in diphtheria patients, and thus he concluded that
diphtheria bacillus causes diphtheria. Yet diphtheria bacillus can be
found in a healthy throat as well. The same can be said about many
diseases, including strep throat, staphylococcus infections, pneumonia,
whooping cough, and so on. In each of these instances, the same
microorganisms can be found in a healthy individual who has been
exposed to the germ yet does not contract the disease. The Pasteurian
theory that bacteria cause disease simply cannot pass the test of mod-
ern research.
Two mentors of mine, Dr. Dickson Thom, a naturopathic physi-
cian practicing in Portland, Oregon, and Dr. Gerard Gueniot, a holis-
tic medical doctor from France, have always taught that disease is only
able to affect a body that is susceptible. When a body is no longer in
homeostasis for any reason—for example, improper diet, poor lifestyle
habits, genetic family history, chronic emotional stress, environmental
toxin overload, or sedentary lifestyle—it becomes weaker, rendering it
less able to defend itself against certain microorganisms and other dis-
ease states. We call this general state of bodily reactivity and health one’s
“terrain.” Based on the strength of one’s terrain, disease can be either
avoided or inevitable. According to Dr. Rene Dubos, renowned micro-
biologist at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, “Viruses and
bacteria are not the cause of the disease; there is something else. Most
human beings carry throughout life a variety of microbial agents poten-
tially pathogenic for them; only when something happens which upsets
the equilibrium between host and parasite does infection develop into
disease.”
This means it is not the bacterium or virus that affects us; it is the
upset equilibrium that weakens our resistance, thereby allowing disease
Modern Health Paradigms
7


===PAGE 22===
to occur. Regardless of what we call this equilibrium (or homeostasis
or terrain or susceptibility), what we are speaking of is the body’s abil-
ity to remain disease free.
The Health of Our Children Equals 
the Health of Our Future
If we have a strong belief in maintaining a healthy terrain, it follows
that we want to promote health in our children. As children grow big-
ger and stronger, the insides of their bodies are also developing in
important ways that we are unable to see. Children’s nervous system,
brain, and immune system develop throughout childhood. To promote
optimal health and development, it is important to protect children’s
terrains through proper diet and lifestyle. If we focus on minimizing
pesticide residues, hormones, and antibiotic residues in foods; includ-
ing nutritive foods as part of a balanced diet; eliminating food allergies;
and eliminating sugars, white flour, and other immune-suppressive
foods, children will be much healthier in the long run. If we promote a
healthy lifestyle from the start, many children will remain disease free.
I believe it is my responsibility to my child to keep her healthy in order
to prevent future chronic disease. It is also important to offer children
a loving, supportive atmosphere in which to grow and develop, because
as you will learn in chapters to come, emotions play an important role
in health and disease.
There is one more thing to note about children’s development.
When a child is faced with a bacterial or viral insult and gets a cold,
flu, or fever, it is a positive reaction. It allows us to see that the child’s
body is able to react against foreign antigens. It is important for chil-
dren to get sick and to mount fevers a few times per year. As this hap-
pens, the immune system is “practicing” and developing. In our medi-
cal practice we often observe that after a child has gone through an
illness, he or she will do something new. He or she may say a new word,
take his or her first step, learn a new skill, act with a little more con-
viction about things, or build more self-confidence. This is a truly amaz-
ing aspect of childhood development; children develop as their immune
response develops. If we damp down the immune response with
Tylenol, antibiotics, or any other suppressive treatment, we are telling
8
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 23===
the body not to react and thus not to practice developing its immune
response. If we suppress children’s reactions enough times, the body
will stop reacting.
The immune system has many components, and if all components
are not exercised and developed, the system can become out of balance.
The child whose immune response has been suppressed too often may
stop having minor infection reactions such as colds and flus, which are
the body’s way of fighting against bacteria, viruses, and any other for-
eign material it is exposed to. Decreasing the proper reaction of the
immune system in children allows them to be exposed to many foreign
invaders that are never fended off. If these invaders are stored instead
of eliminated from the body, they have the potential to cause future
health problems.
Bottom line: Any imbalance in immune function, such as a pro-
longed exposure to foreign invaders without ridding the body of them,
can increase chronic inflammation, decrease the ability to fight off for-
eign invaders, and increase the potential for autoimmune reactions.
What Do We Mean by “Anti-Inflammation Diet”?
I have found that the best type of diet for many people to adopt to
ensure optimal health and healing is an anti-inflammation diet. I learned
Modern Health Paradigms
9
My daughter, Sadie. Our
children can inspire us to
make lifestyle choices that
promote health, so that we
can pass those good habits
along to them.
Photo credit: Jessica Black, N.D.


===PAGE 24===
this diet from my mentor, Dr. Dickson Thom, who teaches at the
National College of Naturopathic Medicine (NCNM), where I received
my medical degree. I was fortunate to work under Dr. Thom in
NCNM’s clinic, where I saw amazing benefits from the anti-inflam-
mation diet. We call this diet anti-inflammatory because it eliminates
many common allergenic foods that may promote inflammation in the
body (see Chapter 2 for a discussion of inflammation). It also reduces
intake of pesticides, hormones, and antibiotic residues. The diet is full
of whole foods; it eliminates processed foods, sugars, and other man-
made foods such as hydrogenated oils, and it encourages ample vege-
table intake for essential nutrients. By reducing the intake of toxins and
other difficult-to-digest substances, the anti-inflammation diet promotes
easier digestion and offers less insult to the body. If the blood and lymph
are properly supplied with nutrients and if foods that are difficult to
digest or assimilate are eliminated, cellular function—or, in other words,
metabolism—improves. Therefore, the body is supported in ways that
facilitate cellular regeneration rather than cellular degeneration, which
can promote disease.
The anti-inflammation diet that is presented in this book is the most
extreme form of the diet. Even partially adopting the diet will promote
many positive changes in health. For example, eliminating all white
flour, all white sugar, and nonorganic meats while still eating whole
wheat, molasses, and organic meats will improve health.
For some individuals and families, making the change to an anti-
inflammation diet may be a slow transition. It doesn’t have to happen
overnight; even gradually adopting the diet will improve health and
decrease the chance for future chronic disease. If one already has a
chronic disease, a quicker transition to the anti-inflammation diet will
make a larger difference in health. For example, an individual with can-
cer will want to make sacrifices to shift more quickly to the diet; doing
so will promote positive changes that will support any cancer treatment
the patient is undergoing, whether conventional or otherwise. Again,
this diet truly has the potential to cleanse the system enough to make
any treatment—allopathic or “alternative”—more effective.
Another thing to remember is that not everyone will react nega-
tively to all of the foods listed in this diet as “foods to avoid.” After
strictly following the anti-inflammation diet for a certain length of time,
10
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 25===
reintroducing some of the foods may be acceptable, and if no adverse
reactions are noticed during reintroduction, that particular food may
be tolerated (but it still shouldn’t be consumed daily). How to reintro-
duce foods is discussed in Chapter 3.
Modern Health Paradigms
11


===PAGE 26===
CHAPTER 2
Inflammation: What’s the
Big Deal?
Researchers are finding more and more evidence linking chronic inflam-
mation with chronic disease. According to an article written by Michael
Downey that appeared in the February 2005 issue of the magazine Bet-
ter Nutrition, many inflammatory markers in the body are directly or
indirectly related to cardiovascular disease, cancer, Alzheimer’s disease,
autoimmune diseases, and even asthma. Even healthy cells sometimes
mount an immune response against normal cells, resulting in an inflam-
matory attack on certain tissues such as those found in joints, nerves,
and connective tissue. This is how inflammation may be related to
autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclero-
sis, lupus, or psoriasis.
What Is Inflammation?
Inflammation is the first response by the immune system to infection
or irritation. It presents with the cardinal signs of redness (Latin: rubor),
heat (calor), swelling (tumor), pain (dolor), and dysfunction of the
organs involved. Acute inflammation is needed to help heal acute
trauma, abrasions, broken bones, or acute invasion of a foreign sub-
stance such as bee venom from a bee sting. The body reacts immedi-
ately to acute trauma by increasing substances in the body that stimu-
late swelling, redness, pain, and heat. These responses are important
because they keep the body from doing further damage to the injury or
wound by promoting pain and swelling all around the injured area.
This causes an individual to be more cautious when moving the affected
part. For example, if you break your wrist, the pain and inflammation
12



===PAGE 27===
will force you to protect the wrist from further damage that could occur
if you used it or moved it too quickly.
Chronic inflammation is an ongoing, low level of inflammation,
invisible to the human eye, that usually occurs as a response to pro-
longed acute inflammation or repetitive injuries. We are now also find-
ing that chronic inflammation is associated with many diseases. It is
unknown how inflammation begins in chronic disease, but there are
many theories, some of which are discussed in this chapter.
Chronic inflammation can and will lead to necrosis (tissue destruc-
tion) by the inflammatory cells and by certain other agents. The body’s
healing response depends upon many factors, including persistent infec-
tion, the presence of foreign material or other agents that stimulate
inflammation (such as latent viruses, bacteria, or parasites), inadequate
blood supply, irradiation, and locally applied drugs such as corticoster-
oids. Other systemic factors include age (the healing process becomes
slower and less effective with increasing age); deficiencies in nutrients
such as vitamin C, zinc, and protein; chronic food allergies; metabolic
diseases such as renal failure or diabetes mellitus; degenerative states
associated with malignancies; and systemic drugs such as corticosteroids
(these drugs can be used both topically and systemically).
Inflammation, fever, tissue swelling, and allergies are largely con-
trolled by fatty acids called prostaglandins. There are three different
families of prostaglandins that serve three different functions in the
body:
1. PGE1 helps to reduce allergies, prevents inflammation, increases
mucous production in the stomach, decreases blood pressure,
improves nerve function, and also helps to promote immune
response.
2. PGE2 stimulates the allergy response, promotes inflammation,
increases platelet aggregation (when platelets stick to the site of
plaque formations along blood vessel walls, leading to the devel-
opment of localized blood clots, which can further block the
flow of blood in the artery), increases smooth-muscle contrac-
tion, and suppresses immune function.
3. PGE3 blocks the release of proinflammatory prostaglandins
(PGE2), promotes immune function, decreases platelet aggrega-
Inflammation: What’s the Big Deal?
13


===PAGE 28===
tion, increases HDL cholesterol (the “good” cholesterol),
decreases triglycerides, and inhibits inflammation.
In simple terms, you can think of PGE1 and PGE3 as the “good”
prostaglandins and PGE2 as the proinflammatory or “bad” prosta-
glandin.
As you might expect, certain foods can promote production of cer-
tain prostaglandins. Linoleic acid (from safflower oil, sunflower oil and
seeds, sesame oil and seeds, and breast milk) is converted into PGE1.
Arachidonic acid (from meats, dairy products, and breast milk) is con-
verted into PGE2. Alpha-linolenic acid (from pumpkin seeds, flaxseeds,
walnuts, soybeans, and breast milk) is converted into PGE3. Eicosa-
pentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can be made
by the body from alpha-linolenic acid (ALA). EPA and DHA promote
the PGE3 pathway (the “good” pathway) and are found in breast milk
and cold-water fish such as salmon, mackerel, sardines, and trout.
Having an understanding of the inflammatory cascade and the way
foods can influence inflammatory pathways in the body allows us to
understand the importance of nutrient intake on how our body func-
tions as a whole. For example, if we make sure to include plenty of nuts,
seeds, and cold-water fish in our diets, we will naturally be inhibiting
inflammation. Consuming these foods will increase PGE1 levels, which
will in turn inhibit the formation of PGE2, one of the inflammatory
prostaglandins.
The bodily enzymes involved in creating prostaglandins and arachi-
donic acid metabolites are of great importance with regard to the use
of anti-inflammatory medication. For example, the important enzyme
phospholipase A2 (PLA2) allows arachidonic acid to be released from
cell membranes. Arachidonic acid production is the first step in pro-
moting inflammation. Another enzyme, cyclooxygenase, is needed to
convert arachidonic acid into PGE2, prostacyclins, and thromboxanes,
all of which promote inflammation. (Hint: You can tell a substance is
an enzyme if its name ends in –ase.) Lipooxygenase is needed to pro-
mote the conversion of arachidonic acid into many other inflammation-
producing prostaglandins. The cyclooxygenase-1 pathway helps in the
formation of the stomach lining, and the cyclooxygenase-2 pathway
promotes inflammation. Many anti-inflammation drugs affect both
cyclooxygenase pathways, and thus harm the stomach lining. This topic
14
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 29===
is discussed in more detail later, in the section on the harm in using anti-
inflammation drugs for the long term.
Inflammation and Chronic Disease
As mentioned, recent research supports the surprising connection
between chronic inflammation and chronic illnesses such as heart dis-
ease, autoimmune diseases, cancer, osteoporosis, and more. In Febru-
ary of 2004, Time magazine featured a cover article on the connection
between certain chronic diseases and inflammation. Let’s take a look
at the impact of inflammation on a few significant health conditions:
heart disease, diabetes, chronic pain (specifically, fibromyalgia), and
insomnia.
Heart Disease
Under the umbrella term of “heart disease” we can include conditions
such as stroke, atherosclerosis, heart attack, and high blood pressure.
The risk factors often checked for heart disease are cholesterol levels,
blood pressure, fasting glucose, and, less commonly, C-reactive protein
(CRP), homocysteine, lipoprotein A, ferritin, fibrinogen, and a few oth-
ers. Other risk factors for cardiovascular disease include having a type-
A personality, a family history of heart disease, lack of a significant
other, sedentary lifestyle, smoking, infection, ischemia, oxidative dam-
age (caused by free radicals), inflammation, and insulin resistance.
Most risk factors for heart disease can stimulate the release of vari-
ous inflammatory promoters, reactive oxygen species (free radicals),
nitric oxide (discussed later), and immune cells as a result of tissue
injury. (Again, when we are talking about inflammation in this context,
we are talking about inflammation occurring at a cellular level unde-
tected by the human eye.) Micro damage to tissues or repetitive stress
on certain tissues can promote tissue injury, which results in an inflam-
matory reaction of the immune system. In turn, prolonged inflamma-
tion puts people at risk for heart disease. This creates a vicious cycle:
Many risk factors for heart disease increase inflammation, and, in turn,
low-grade inflammation increases risk for heart disease.
The three types of cell that are susceptible to cardiovascular risk
factors include epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and immune cells.
Inflammation: What’s the Big Deal?
15


===PAGE 30===
Epithelial cells line the blood vessels and are responsible for controlling
the flow of nutrients, hormones, and immune mediators from cell to
cell. They also regulate vascular tone, which affects blood flow through
vessels. (“Vascular” means of or relating to the blood vessels or lymph
vessels.) Smooth muscle cells help to control constriction and dilation
of blood vessels (vasoconstriction and vasodilation), thereby acting as
major regulators of blood pressure. Immune cells help to defend and
repair the vascular tissue from chemical and biological insult. Any dis-
ruption to the homeostasis, or balance, of these cells can contribute to
heart disease risk. According to an article published in March 2004 in
the journal Alternative Medicine Review, chronic inflammation is the
most common insult to these three tissue types, resulting in less than
optimal functioning of the cardiovascular system.
In response to inflammation that results from tissue injury or expo-
sure to toxic chemicals, epithelial cells produce a variety of molecules
that contribute to heart disease risk. These include clotting and coagu-
lation factors, fibrinolysis factors (which can promote abnormal bleed-
ing), prostaglandins, and vascular tone regulators such as nitric oxide.
Nitric oxide (NO) is worth mentioning because it plays a major part in
the regulation of blood pressure through its vasodilation-promoting
capabilities. A prolonged increase in blood sugar, as found in diabetes,
will decrease NO, which in turn will lead to increased vasoconstriction
and increased blood pressure (hypertension).
During hypertension, some smooth muscle cells may change to
more secretory cells instead of the elastic-type cells they are meant to
be. Smooth muscle cells are usually elastic in nature to allow adapta-
tion to the varying degree of blood pressure experienced throughout
the day. The new, secretory smooth muscle cells can release growth pro-
moters and begin to form a lesion of proliferating secretory smooth
muscle cells along the blood vessel. This lesion is clinically significant
because as it grows and develops it shows significant cholesterol and
lipid deposits that cause the wall to weaken as the cells experience apop-
tosis (cell death). As this area of cells weakens the vascular wall, it
becomes an aneurysm. An aneurysm is a clinically significant cardio-
vascular risk factor because it has the potential to rupture and cause
instant death. In conditions associated with oxidative stress (damage to
tissues from free radicals), such as high cholesterol, NO may be ele-
16
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 31===
vated but inactive, and therefore unable to promote vasodilation of
blood vessels to reduce blood pressure and combat the possibility of
aneurysm.
So you might be wondering how all this information is related to
an anti-inflammatory diet. Reducing inflammation through diet will
reduce inflammatory mediators in the body that cause oxidative dam-
age to cells. Furthermore, reducing inflammation and reducing blood
pressure through exercise and diet can decrease many cardiovascular
risks. Finally, reducing inflammation can decrease the minor tissue dam-
age that promotes even further inflammation (which triggers a vicious
cycle).
How does the anti-inflammation diet accomplish all these things?
Excess fat-soluble toxins that we obtain through diet are stored in our
fat cells and are transferred to other locations within our body via cho-
lesterol. As we begin to stimulate optimal health through a healthier
diet, exercise, and stress reduction, we create a better-functioning
immune system and have better detoxification abilities. Exercise helps
to eliminate toxins through sweat and breath, and following the anti-
inflammatory diet helps to reduce intake of the water-soluble and fat-
soluble toxins that are part of the standard American diet, such as pes-
ticide residues, antibiotics, hormones, preservatives, heavy metals, and
other chemicals (e.g., artificial colors and flavorings). As our bodies
become more efficient and we eat a purer diet—one that eliminates
these toxic burdens—cholesterol levels begin to decrease and NO can
begin to normalize its function. In addition, healthier lifestyles reduce
stress on the body, leading to a reduction in the secretion of stress hor-
mones (discussed in more detail below).
Let me say it again more simply: By decreasing intake of the tox-
ins normally ingested as part of the typical American diet, we can
reduce overall inflammation and thereby reduce the load on the car-
diovascular and other systems in the body.
Diabetes
Accumulating evidence suggests that chronic low-grade inflammation
is also a risk factor for type-II diabetes. A study published by the Ameri-
can Journal of Clinical Nutrition in September 2005 reported that a
diet high in inflammation-producing foods, such as refined grains,
Inflammation: What’s the Big Deal?
17


===PAGE 32===
processed meats, and sugars, increased the risk for developing type-II
diabetes. The connection between inflammation and diabetes risk was
also noted as early as 2001 by the Journal of the American Medical
Association.
Chronic Pain and Insomnia
Chronic pain, such as that associated with fibromyalgia, can also be
related to inflammation. Despite the fact that fibromyalgia is not con-
sidered an inflammatory disease, inflammation plays a major role in
symptoms associated with the illness. In fibromyalgia patients in par-
ticular, disturbed sleep plays a major role in disrupted healing. At night
our immune system has the important job of repairing tissues and
cleansing the system of foreign antigens, dead cells, and free radicals.
When an individual is unable to sleep, such as in chronic pain or
fibromyalgia, muscle, blood vessels, and other bodily tissues are not
cleansed and repaired adequately for optimal functioning. This creates
a situation in which inflammation can occur at a cellular level because
tissue is not being repaired correctly, and waste begins to accumulate
within the body because the immune system is not adequately elimi-
nating it.
Many fibromyalgia sufferers have low levels of serotonin, a neu-
rochemical that promotes secretion of growth hormone, is responsible
for mood, promotes sleep, and increases DHEA levels (DHEA is dis-
cussed later). Human growth hormone, which usually increases during
sleep, stimulates the growth of new tissue and facilitates carbohydrate
metabolism to sustain energy throughout the day. As serotonin levels
decrease in fibromyalgia sufferers, growth hormone decreases, insom-
nia occurs, depression is more likely, and, because of decreased DHEA
levels, inflammation is supported. Ninety-five percent of serotonin is
produced within the gastrointestinal tract; therefore, it is very impor-
tant for fibromyalgia sufferers to have a healthy digestive system.
Adopting an anti-inflammatory diet decreases the toxic load on the
digestive system, promotes the health of the gastrointestinal tract, and
decreases the inflammatory response. A better-functioning gastroin-
testinal tract improves serotonin secretion, which in turn improves sleep
and mood. As sleep and mood improve, the immune system is better
able to perform detoxification and to repair damaged tissue at night.
18
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 33===
When inflammation is reduced via dietary changes, tissues heal ade-
quately, sleep improves, and pain lessens.
Stress and Inflammation
It is extremely important to address the topic of stress due to its direct
influence on inflammation. To some degree, our bodies need stress to
help us deal with threatening situations. Our bodies respond to stress
by secreting various hormones to increase energy. At one time, hun-
dreds of years ago, humans needed that quick rise in adrenaline to help
them run from the tiger they encountered in the woods. The daily stress
we deal with now arises from stressors such as work, family, deadlines,
traffic, accumulation of toxins, and environmental stress, to name a
few. Ideally, when stressful events occur, the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem is activated, stimulating production of a stress hormone called cor-
tisol, which in turn promotes an increase in blood sugar. This increase
in blood sugar is designed to supply us with the extra energy needed to
run from the tiger, so to say. But in modern industrialized society, there
is no tiger to run from, just the stress that increases cortisol and blood
sugar. Without the sudden and intense exertion of energy that occurs
when we run from the tiger, we are left with elevated levels of cortisol
and blood sugar that our body does not need. These days, faced with
numerous stressful situations, many people live in a constant state of
sympathetic stimulation, resulting in chronically elevated cortisol lev-
els. Prolonged elevated cortisol can lead to thyroid dysfunction, blood
sugar abnormalities, weight gain, osteoporosis, high blood pressure,
hyperinsulinemia, hypercholesterolemia, and a plethora of other meta-
bolic imbalances.
In addition to increasing cortisol and blood sugar levels, physiologi-
cal or psychological stress promotes inflammation through the release
of certain neuropeptides. (A neuropeptide is a protein that delivers a
message within the nervous system.) These inflammatory neuropeptides
stimulate a systemic, or whole-body, stress response via stimulation of
the sympathetic nervous system and release of stress hormones, of
which cortisol is one. (In fact, the release of neuropeptides is what trig-
gers the release of cortisol in the first place. This whole chain of events
happens in the blink of an eye.) These stress hormones stimulate release
Inflammation: What’s the Big Deal?
19


===PAGE 34===
of acute-phase proteins, which are the first promoters of inflammation.
One thing to note is that the same neuropeptides that mediate stress
also mediate inflammation; therefore it is possible and even likely that
stress creates an inflammatory response in the body.
Let’s learn a little more about how elevated cortisol and elevated
blood sugar can affect health and inflammation. As mentioned, along
with prolonged cortisol output comes a prolonged increase in blood
sugar, or glucose. High blood sugar over time leads to increased insulin
output and to a condition termed insulin resistance. Normally, the job
of the hormone insulin is to allow glucose to enter the cell in times of
increased energy need or when there is an increase in blood sugar.
Insulin resistance occurs when high amounts of insulin are found in the
blood along with high amounts of blood sugar, yet the insulin is not
being used adequately by the cell’s insulin receptors to allow the blood
sugar to enter the cell for energy use. Prolonged increased insulin in turn
triggers cholesterol production. Therefore, increased stress ultimately
leads to increased levels of cholesterol.
Elevated cortisol also contributes to inflammation by increasing lev-
els of interleukin-6 (IL-6), which causes inflammatory reactions and
also decreases the part of the immune system responsible for protection
from viral and bacterial infections. Over time, elevated levels of corti-
sol and IL-6 cause a decrease in a very important hormone called
DHEA. DHEA, thought of as the immune and antiaging hormone, con-
trols age-related disorders, helps repair and maintain tissues, reduces
atherosclerosis, increases insulin sensitivity, controls allergic reactions,
and balances the activity of the immune system. One should note that
DHEA is available over the counter in health-food stores. However, it
should not be taken as a supplement unless the patient’s own bodily
level of DHEA is found to be low on proper lab tests. Furthermore,
supplementation should be directed by a knowledgeable physician.
Negative emotions and lack of supportive relationships significantly
affect immune modulation. Several studies have shown that dysregula-
tion of the immune system may play a role in many conditions associ-
ated with inflammation, including cardiovascular disease, osteoporo-
sis, arthritis, type-II diabetes, certain cancers, and aging. Negative
emotions and prolonged infections have been shown to directly stimu-
late the proinflammatory cytokines that influence these and many other
20
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 35===
conditions. According to Robert A. Anderson, who wrote on autoim-
mune diseases and inflammation in the May 2004 issue of the journal
Townsend Letter for Doctors and Patients, “Abrasive close personal
relationships are seen to provoke persistent immune downregulation.”
(“Immune downregulation” means a decrease in the ability of the
immune system to react efficiently to foreign invaders. It can also mean
an overreaction to nonharmful molecules, such as occurs in allergic
reactions.) According to Anderson, even negative stressful events from
the past that were not processed correctly or resolved increase the risk
for cardiovascular disease, metabolic disease, and degenerative diseases
such as cancer.
This strongly suggests that treatment of stress-induced conditions
requires a holistic approach—one that includes an anti-inflammatory
diet, adequate sleep, exercise, and, if indicated, counseling, journaling,
affirmations, prayer, qi gong (a gentle Chinese healing art that uses a
series of focused mind and body exercises), and nutritional supplemen-
tation.
The Harm in Chronic Use of Anti-Inflammatory
Medication
When someone is in pain, it is common that the individual self-treat
with or be prescribed anti-inflammatory medications such as steroid
drugs or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (also known as
NSAIDs). Steroid-based anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit the immune
system and interfere with the healing process. The NSAID group
includes aspirin, ibuprofen (marketed under the names Motrin and
Advil), and naproxen (Aleve). It does not include acetaminophen
(Tylenol), which is effective against pain and fever but not against
inflammation. Aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen inhibit the cyclooxy-
genase enzymes that promote the production of inflammatory media-
tors (mentioned above). However, because these drugs are not specific,
they also affect the stomach lining, resulting in the possible side effects
of ulcers and gastric (stomach) upset. In addition, NSAIDs block the
release of the more anti-inflammatory prostaglandins, PGE1 and PGE3,
which is contrary to the effect the drug is designed to produce.
Inflammation: What’s the Big Deal?
21


===PAGE 36===
Newer anti-inflammatory medications such as rofecoxib (Vioxx)
mainly affect the cyclooxygenase-2 pathway; accordingly, they are
called COX-2 inhibitors. These drugs are designed to spare the
cyclooxygenase pathway that promotes stomach lining health. They
help with gastrointestinal side effects, but they have not reduced them
completely and are not without their own side effects. And they still
promote the lipooxygenase pathway of inflammatory-promoting sub-
stances. In September 2004, Vioxx was recalled by the Food and Drug
Administration due to its increased risk of cardiovascular events, includ-
ing heart attack and stroke. Since then, Celebrex, also a COX-2 inhibi-
tor and Vioxx’s major competitor, has also raised eyebrows. Its manu-
facturer, Pfizer Inc., has revealed that it halted a study in December of
2004 linking Celebrex to a “statistically significant” increase in cardio-
vascular risk. This was at least the second study that showed increased
heart problems with the use of Celebrex.
A study published in the British Medical Journal in 2005 suggested
that regular ingestion of rofecoxib, diclofenac, and ibuprofen signifi-
cantly increased the risk of having a heart attack. No evidence was
found proving that naproxen had any decreased risk for cardiovascu-
lar problems. This study and many others in the medical literature offer
enough evidence to raise concern about the cardiovascular safety of all
NSAID use.
NSAIDs also have noncardiac side-effects such as swelling, rashes,
asthma, angioedema (deep swelling beneath the skin), urticaria (hives),
anaphylaxis (a potentially life-threatening type of allergic reaction), and
many more. It makes sense to adopt a healthy diet that will naturally
decrease inflammation rather than relying on the long-term use of anti-
inflammatory medications.
22
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 37===
CHAPTER 3
The Importance of Diet
Adopting a healthy, balanced diet can begin to eliminate many of the
problems associated with waste accumulation in the body. It also pro-
vides adequate nutrients essential to the body’s balanced equilibrium.
The role of the digestive system is to bring food in, break it down into
useable energy via nutrient absorption, and dispose of wastes that can-
not be efficiently used. The higher the quality of food we eat, the more
nutrients and energy we obtain from it.
Mitigating the Effects of Toxic Overload
We are exposed daily to both environmental toxins and food byprod-
ucts accumulated through diet. As we ingest nonuseable chemicals con-
tained in foods, such as hormones, pesticides, antibiotic residues, and
other compounds, our body must work extra hard to digest these for-
eign substances in addition to obtaining nutrients from the same foods.
The liver and kidneys, which are responsible for metabolizing toxic
compounds, must work at breaking down toxins from our environ-
ment, our food, and our own metabolic processes. The human body is
not 100 percent efficient as it performs metabolism. It tends to make
wastes, endogenous toxins that need to be processed and excreted from
the body. The efficiency with which a person’s body excretes these
cumulative wastes determines his or her “terrain” (the body’s suscepti-
bility to disease due to its biochemical and energetic environment). As
this implies, different individuals have different terrains.
In addition to environmental and dietary toxins, pharmaceutical
drugs are another source of outside toxins. Again, the liver and kidneys
are mainly responsible for catabolizing (breaking down) and excreting
these toxins. Finally, in addition to having to metabolize toxins and
wastes, the body must be able to digest and break down airborne and
23



===PAGE 38===
food-borne allergens. Does it make sense that we overload our systems
by accumulating more toxins? Does it also make sense that reducing
dietary toxins can enhance how effectively we eliminate the remaining
ones?
Here is an analogy to help you understand the body’s capacity for
stress, toxins, allergens, and metabolic wastes and how they could relate
to your diet. Imagine you have a cup that holds eight fluid ounces. This
cup symbolizes your potential toxin and allergen intake. If you fill the
cup with six ounces of food allergies, you can take in only two more
ounces before the cup overflows and you can no longer deal with the
toxins. If you are then exposed to environmental toxins, pollens in the
springtime, and pharmaceutical drugs, your cup cannot handle all of
the insults to your system. As your cup overflows, you may experience
pain, runny nose, postnasal drip, cough, rash, fatigue, and many other
symptoms (discussed later in the section on food allergy).
On the other hand, if you remove the six ounces of food allergies,
you have an increased ability to take in and process toxins and aller-
gens that cannot be avoided. For example, patients who are extremely
allergic to grass and pollen cannot remove all of the grass and pollen
from their lives, but they can decrease their food allergies to allow their
body to better process grass and pollens.
You Really Are What You Eat
The most important part of my practice in the development of a treat-
ment plan with my patients is diet. You have probably heard the phrase
“you are what you eat” a million times throughout your life. Have you
ever stopped to think of what the phrase means or why it has become
such a popular cliché?
Laws of physics state that every object or being can be broken
down into smaller and smaller molecules. The smallest part that makes
up any object or being is energy. Because all objects are made of energy,
we can deduce that human beings are made wholly of energy. This also
means that all food is energy. If we stopped eating energy-giving foods
to fuel our body processes, we could not live for very long. That said,
doesn’t it make sense to pay attention to what we consume each day?
The food we eat is the fuel for all bodily processes. If you value your
24
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 39===
car and want it to run at its optimal level, wouldn’t you put the best-
quality gas and oil into it? Likewise, if you value your body (and,
accordingly, your health and your life), isn’t it time to put the best-qual-
ity food or “fuel” into it?
Just as different objects have varying energy composition, different
foods also have varying energies. We need to pay attention to the qual-
ity of food we put into our bodies. Food that is organically grown, is
freshly picked, and has spent the least amount of time in transport has
the most vitality and therefore will offer you the highest-quality energy
and nutrients. The more processing a food undergoes, the more toxins
and the less energy and nutrient value it holds. Here’s general rule to
remember: If you can’t tell what a food is by looking at it, don’t eat it.
For example, white bread is made from wheat, but does it look like
wheat? Can you tell it was made from wheat? Then you probably
should not eat it.
Eating foods that are locally produced and in season is a great way
to ensure good quality and good vitality. Foods that have been dehy-
drated, boxed for weeks or sometimes months, or canned in aluminum
may be devoid of energy and full of preservatives, additives, and pos-
sibly dyes. These processed food items may offer a significantly reduced
amount of nutrients compared with fresh foods. We can obtain some
vital micronutrients (vitamins, minerals, and phytochemicals), which
are used to support metabolism and energy, through supplementation,
but the macronutrients needed for the body’s fuel (carbohydrates, pro-
teins, and fats) can only come from food. Because the food we eat is
our only source of fuel, we really are what we eat. Eating food out of
cans day after day may leave a person feeling fatigued and devoid of
energy, similar to the energy of the food he or she is consuming.
Food Allergies, Food Intolerances, and Inflammation
One vital component of a healthy diet is the elimination of any food
allergies or intolerances. Food allergies are becoming increasingly com-
mon within our population. I believe the development of food allergies
and intolerances is due in part to our nonrotating diet of similar foods.
For example, one might eat wheat three or more times a day, in the
form of toast for breakfast, a sandwich for lunch, and pasta for dinner.
The Importance of Diet
25


===PAGE 40===
So, what is a food allergy? Basically, a food allergy is the result of
an immune-system reaction to certain food proteins. The immune sys-
tem stimulates histamine release, resulting in runny nose, watery eyes,
and production of throat mucous. More severe reactions can include
hives, abdominal cramping, diarrhea, or even anaphylaxis. (A longer
list of symptoms of food allergies appears below.)
The immune system’s reaction to food allergies can cause inflam-
matory responses. When someone has an allergy to a certain food, con-
sumption of that food can stimulate production of antibodies that have
the potential to bind with the food or to cross-react with normal tissue,
resulting in an autoimmune or inflammatory reaction. Any inflamma-
tion in the body interferes with and slows down metabolism and the
healing response. Furthermore, food allergens often are not digested
properly and thus can be another source of “morbid matter” accumu-
lated in the body that must be eliminated via the kidneys, liver, and
other organs of detoxification. The anti-inflammation diet eliminates
most possible food allergies for most people.
In contrast to a food allergy, a food intolerance is a nonmediated
immune reaction. Perhaps an individual lacks the enzymes needed to
break down certain foods, such as in milk intolerance (lactose intoler-
ance). Food sensitivities can occur when an individual is unable to eat
certain foods, yet does not have an immune reaction to them. I believe
another cause of food intolerances or food sensitivities is an imbalance
in or a lack of the proper microbial flora that normally line the gas-
trointestinal tract such as Lactobacillus acidophilus and Lactobacillus
bifidus. The balance of these microorganisms plays a part in how resil-
ient our gastrointestinal tract is.
Symptoms of food allergies and food intolerances often overlap,
making it difficult to distinguish the true cause. I am not concerned with
why patients cannot eat certain foods; I am concerned with how much
better they feel after omitting the offending food from their diets.
Several methods exist to test for food intolerances or allergies. The
true gold standard is an elimination and challenge diet. If a person is
very diligent, this approach can be an inexpensive and very effective
approach to discovering food allergies or intolerances. I reserve this
approach to the anti-inflammation diet for individuals with average to
good health.
26
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 41===
The best way to implement the elimination and challenge diet is to
strictly follow the anti-inflammation diet suggested in this book for four
weeks. After that time, each food can be introduced individually in its
most whole form. For example, to introduce tomatoes, eat one whole
tomato after avoiding anything with tomatoes for four weeks; do not
eat tomato sauce or tomato soup. After eating the tomato, don’t eat
any more tomatoes or tomato products for three days because some
reactions may be delayed. After three days, assuming you’ve had no
reaction to the tomato, you can probaby assume that tomatoes are a
safe food for you. Then you can introduce the next food in its whole
form, wait three days, and so on. If you have a reaction immediately,
then you can assume the food you introduced is not good for you and
that you should avoid it. Since you’ve already shown a reaction to the
recently introduced food, you may introduce the next food without
waiting the usual 3 days.
If you have a hard time strictly following the anti-inflammation
diet, you may instead eliminate and then reintroduce one food at a time.
For example, avoid all dairy products for one month. Then reintroduce
it by drinking one glass of milk, and wait up to three days for any reac-
tion. Then eliminate the next food, and so on.
Most people will react to foods in the bodily system where they are
most susceptble. For example, if one is prone to migraines, then a
migraine may occur; if one is prone to diarrhea or digestive distress,
then diarrhea may occur. Reactions are not limited to susceptible sys-
tems, however, and can be anything from mild congestion to mood dis-
turbance to severe abdominal cramps. Some reactions may be immedi-
ate and some may be delayed; that is why we have individuals wait up
to three whole days before introducing the next food.
After following the elimination and challenge diet, one may learn
what types of foods he or she reacts to. It has been my experience and
observation, however, that for someone with a chronic disease, fol-
lowing the diet the way it is presented will offer the best optimal health.
For example, it is recommended that chronically ill patients avoid
wheat—even organic whole wheat and even if no reaction is noted dur-
ing the elmination and challenge phase of the diet—until their health
improves and their terrain is treated.
The Importance of Diet
27


===PAGE 42===
Certain Foods That Contribute to Inflammation
The list of foods to avoid for the anti-inflammation diet includes all
wheat products, dairy products, potatoes, tomatoes, corn, sugar, citrus
fruits, pork, commercial (nonorganic) eggs, shellfish, peanuts and
peanut butter, coffee, alcohol, juice, caffeinated teas, soda, anything
containing hydrogenated oils, processed foods, and fried foods. Many
of these foods can contribute directly to inflammation. For example,
tomatoes and potatoes, which are part of the Solanaceae or nightshade
family of vegetables, are known to cause inflammation. Tomatoes and
potatoes should definitely be avoided by anyone with arthritis of any
kind.
Dairy products are worth mentioning because they tend to be very
high in fat. The amount of fat really isn’t the problem, though, because
the amount of fat-soluble toxins that are stored in the fat becomes the
true issue. We know that conventionally raised dairy cows, and conse-
quently dairy products, are bombarded with toxins in the form of pes-
ticide residues on feed and genetically modified soy products in the feed.
Many cattle, who are naturally herbivores, are even fed animal protein,
which contains its own accumulated toxins and thus in turn further
increases the total toxin load in dairy products. As a result, dairy prod-
ucts contribute to the load of toxins that the body’s immune system
must process and eliminate (or store if the body is under stress and thus
unable to eliminate the toxins).
You may be wondering how you are going to obtain the calcium
necessary for bone health if you are asked to avoid milk. Isn’t avoiding
milk especially risky for the development of children’s bones? The dairy
industry has done an excellent job of marketing the notion that every-
one needs to drink milk to keep bones healthy and strong. In fact, there
are many nondairy sources of calcium, including fortified soy, rice, oat,
almond, and other nut milks.
The body absorbs only about 30 percent of the calcium contained
in dairy products. The Townsend Letter for Doctors and Patients, in a
summary of over twenty different articles, concluded that an allergy to
cow’s milk is common amoung adults and children. In fact, intact milk
proteins are known to stimulate the secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines in susceptible patients, such as those with cow’s milk allergy.
28
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 43===
In addition, because our standard diet is largely made up of animal pro-
teins (including milk proteins), which are acidic in nature, the body
removes calcium from the bones to help balance the pH in the gas-
trointestinal system.
If one finds they do not react to dairy and want to include it in their
diet, I suggest eating only organic dairy products. They don’t contain
the pesticide residues, hormones, and antibiotic residues regular dairy
may contain. That’s because the cows are held to higher feeding stan-
dards and therefore don’t accumulate uneccessary toxins through their
diet. Still, even organic dairy products shouldn’t be consumed daily.
The best—and an often overlooked—substitute to drinking milk is
drinking water. I want my patients to drink half their weight in fluid
ounces of filtered water daily. (One cup equals eight fluid ounces. There-
fore, a person weighing 140 pounds should drink seventy fluid ounces
of water daily, which works out to about nine cups, or a little over two
quarts.) Drinking filtered water is important because it reduces the toxin
load by filtering out unwanted metals such as aluminum and lead, bac-
teria, hormones, pesticide residues, industrial polutants, solvents, toxic
elements, and other water-soluble toxins. Liquids to consume as part
of the anti-inflammation diet include filtered water and herbal teas
made with filtered water. All caffeinated beverages and beverages con-
taining sugar are avoided. Juice is avoided because it is a large source
of concentrated sugar, even though it is a natural sugar. Ask yourself if
you can eat four oranges in one sitting. If the answer is no, then you
should not consume an eight-ounce glass of orange juice, which con-
tains the equivalent amount of sugar yet lacks the beneficial fiber con-
tent the whole fruit would have.
Alcohol should be avoided because it turns into sugar once in the
body. Coffee and other caffeinated beverages are very taxing to the liver
due to their toxin load and are taxing to the adrenal glands because of
caffeine’s effect on cortisol levels. The adrenal glands, located on top of
the kidneys, are responsible for maintaining energy, producing sex hor-
mones, balancing blood pressure and blood sugar, and moderating the
stress response. If a person’s system is already burdened with physio-
logical or psychological stressors, caffeine will exhaust any stress-mod-
erating resources left in the body. Caffeine also has a detrimental effect
on weight loss and can cause anxiety, anger, insomnia, and irritability.
The Importance of Diet
29


===PAGE 44===
Commercial eggs, beef, and pork are included on the list of foods
to avoid largely for the same reasons that dairy is to be avoided: because
of the toxin content and acidifying nature of the animal protein. Pork
and beef are high in arachidonic acid, which, as discussed in Chapter
2, promotes inflammation. Some organic beef is allowed but should be
eaten sparingly. Pork, even organic, is not allowed on this diet because
of its potential to stimulate an autoimmune reaction and due to its fat
quality. Pigs have very similar protein structures to humans; thus, con-
suming pork can increase the chance of cross-reactions in the immune
system. A cross-reaction occurs when the immune system reacts to the
pork proteins that are so similar to human proteins, simultaneously trig-
gering an immune response against the body’s own cells. In his book
The Maker’s Diet, Jordan Rubin describes pork as an unclean meat; he
compares pork with beef based on the complexity of the two animals’
digestive systems. Rubin states that meat from cows is a “cleaner” meat
than pork because of cows’ complex digestion (they have four stomach
chambers) and because of what cows eat. Because pigs often live in
unclean environments, have noncomplex digestion, and will eat any-
thing, including their own young, he considers them to have lower-qual-
ity fats, making them a lower-quality food. Studies have shown that the
visible fat content in pork is very high in arachidonic acid compared to
beef, though the actual meat of pork is lower in arachidonic acid. The
anti-inflammatory diet is developed to nourish the body on all levels.
Pork is not allowed on this diet for more than one reason: because of
its high levels of arachidonic acid and because of its potential to create
immune-system imbalance.
Organic eggs that are free of hormone and pesticide residues and
that come from free-range chickens are allowed, but they should not
be eaten every day because of their animal-protein content.
Sugar causes many abnormal reactions in the body and should be
avoided by all individuals. Sugar depresses the immune system and
doesn’t offer any nutrients to the diet. Prolonged high-sugar diets con-
tribute to high glucose levels, high insulin levels, and high cholesterol
levels, all of which increase heart disease risk, insulin resistance, and
diabetes risk.
Shellfish and peanuts are avoided as part of the anti-inflammation
diet because many people have allergies to them. Peanuts also grow an
30
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 45===
aflatoxin on their surface, which has been shown to increase the inci-
dence of cancer in some individuals; peanuts must be processed care-
fully to avoid production of this substance.
Corn is another common allergen that needs to be avoided. Con-
ventionally grown corn has often undergone a significant amount of
genetic engineering and been subjected to heavy bombardment with
pesticides.
Wheat is worth discussing, because our standard diet has gone
wheat crazy. If you want a good perspective on wheat use in today’s
diet, ask anyone who has celiac disease, which is a disease of gluten
intolerance that results in bowel problems. Think of the typical Ameri-
can family and what they eat on a daily basis. As mentioned above, one
might have cereal, toast, or pancakes for breakfast, a sandwich for
lunch, and then pasta or pizza for dinner. The typical family may con-
sume wheat three times daily. Today, wheat is not what it was a hun-
dred years ago. Wheat has been greatly genetically modified; further-
more, many nutrients are removed in the refining and processing of
wheat. Genetically modifying wheat has increased its gluten content to
90 percent, which is highly irregular. It is possible that the genetic modi-
fication of wheat has changed its structure into something our body
does not recognize as “safe to pass.” In their book Dangerous Grains,
James Brady and Ron Hoggan describe gluten as a protein that the
immune system reacts to pathologically, producing inflammation. Their
theory, supported by evidence, is that gluten destroys healthy tissue
through molecular mimicry, or cross-reaction. According to an article
published in the November 2001 issue of the journal Annals of Allergy,
Asthma, and Immunology, the substances CRP and IL-6 are increased
during acute allergic reactions. Remember that CRP and IL-6 stimulate
inflammation. This same reaction can be seen with any food allergy,
wheat just being a common example.
Citrus fruits may increase inflammation in the body; they also tend
to aggravate arthritis symptoms. It isn’t clear why citrus foods trigger
inflammatory joint symptoms in some people but not others; however,
in many people with rheumatoid arthritis, one or more of the foods to
be avoided on this diet will make their condition worse. Again, this
doesn’t mean that all these foods are necessarily bad for everyone. Just
as a bee sting can cause an extreme reaction in one person and not in
The Importance of Diet
31


===PAGE 46===
another, these foods may cause joint pains in some individuals but not
others.
Remember that during the elimination and challenge phase of the
diet, you may begin to consume these foods again to see if you react to
them. For example, if you reintroduce peanuts and do not react to them
in a negative way, you can eat them, but not every day. (Remember that
one of the key features of a healthy diet is variety.) Knowing your food
reactions will be helpful in treating and preventing chronic disease.
Interestingly, a person may find that they react to nonorganic corn, but
not to organic corn.
Finally, besides foods that commonly trigger allergies or sensitivities,
other foods that should be avoided are processed foods, foods contain-
ing hydrogenated oils, and fried foods. Foods containing hydrogenated
oils, including fried foods, stimulate the release of the inflammation-
promoting prostaglandins. Any foods that are processed are going to
contain large amounts of preservatives, toxins, and dyes, all of which
contribute to the body’s overall toxic load. In addition, they have often
been sitting on shelves for weeks or months before purchase, clearly
reducing their level of vital nutrients.
Symptoms of Food Allergies
Symptoms of food allergies or intolerances include headaches, constant
clearing of the throat, mucous in the throat, abdominal complaints such
as bloating or cramping, irritable bowel syndrome, irritable bowel dis-
ease, fatigue, migraines, arthritis, asthma, eczema, psoriasis, most skin
complaints, acne, aphthous (mouth) ulcers, sinusitis (inflammation of
the sinus cavities, resulting in runny nose and/or congestion), otitis
media (ear infection), chronic cough, and chronic allergies to pollens,
molds, or other environmental agents. Food allergies may also trigger
minor or major mood changes, including depression, anger, hyperac-
tivity, or anxiety.
Other Common Food Allergies
Besides the list of foods to avoid on the anti-inflammation diet, other
foods that may trigger allergies or sensitivities include food dyes, espe-
32
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 47===
cially yellow and red; dried fruit, especially for diabetics due to its con-
centrated sugar; chocolate, which contains caffeine, and, in the case of
milk chocolate, dairy; aspartame (NutraSweet); bananas; meat preser-
vatives (nitrites); monosodium glutamate (MSG); onions; pickled her-
ring; and some vinegars. This diet removes most major food allergens.
If you still experience symptoms after following the diet closely, con-
sider removing the rest of these potential irritants from your diet.
The Importance of Diet
33


===PAGE 48===
CHAPTER 4
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
This chapter summarizes how to follow the anti-inflammation diet. The
section entitled “The Anti-Inflammation Diet: A Summary,” on page
41, is a summary of foods that are allowed and foods to avoid.
The Building Blocks
The basic constituents of any diet include protein, fat, carbohydrate,
fiber, vitamins, and minerals. Of these, only protein, fat, and carbohy-
drate contain calories. (Alcohol also contains calories, but it is not rec-
ommended as part of the anti-inflammation diet.) The proportions I
suggest for each of these components are listed below:
Macronutrient Percentages for Optimal Health
Protein
20–30% of total calories
Fat (primarily a balance of essential fatty acids)
20–30% of total calories
Carbohydrate (primarily complex carbohydrates)
40–60% of total calories
Even for people who need or want to lose weight, instead of greatly
restricting calories, the anti-inflammation plan allows them to eat a
moderate-calorie diet, including healthy snacks throughout the day. The
low-fat, low-calorie diet often proposed to achieve weight loss typically
ends in a perpetual cycle of weight loss and weight regain. You should
not have to greatly restrict calorie intake to lose weight if you are eat-
ing the right foods.
Protein
Eating enough good-quality protein at each meal is one of the best ways
to maintain appropriate and steady levels of blood sugar, which trans-
late into stabilized energy levels and mood throughout the day. Adult
34



===PAGE 49===
protein intake should equal 45–60 grams per day. Organic sources of
protein are best in order to avoid pesticide residues, antibiotics, and
hormones. For meat eaters, organic, grass-fed beef is okay, but should
be limited to one or two servings weekly. Other meats that are allowed
on the diet include free-range, antibiotic-free chicken or turkey (in order
to meet USDA standards, poultry cannot be fed hormones), lamb, wild
game, and wild fish.
Soy is an excellent source of protein for meat eaters and vegetari-
ans. Sources of fermented soy, such as miso, tempeh, and soy sauce,
offer more cancer-fighting antioxidants than nonfermented sources such
as soy milk and tofu. Nuts, seeds, and legumes of any type are good
sources of protein. Meals that combine grains with legumes make a
complete protein. Eggs from free-range, antibiotic-free chickens are a
great source of protein. They should be slow cooked, poached, or soft
boiled to prevent the oxidation of the egg protein. Avocados have a
good amount of protein in addition to healthy fat; they make a great
snack for midmorning or afternoon. Are you worried that the avocado
contains too much fat? Keep reading.
The Fat Story
At one time or another, we all worried about eating too much fat. That
concern should be replaced with the question “Am I eating the right
kind of fat?” I have a few tips on fat intake that may come in handy as
you convert to an anti-inflammatory diet. The body’s fat has the poten-
tial to store toxins that are not eliminated properly. Therefore, our
intake of animal fat should come mostly from organic sources, due to
the potential of animals to store toxins in their fat tissue. Furthermore,
nonorganic sources of fat may be exposed to more toxins, such as pes-
ticides (which can come from both animal and plant sources of fat),
antibiotics, hormones, and other such compounds.
Three Types of Fat
Fat intake is extremely important for our bodies. We need some fat in
our diet to maintain vital body functions, to incorporate into cell mem-
branes, and to inhibit excessive fat storage. Again, instead of worrying
so much about the amount of fat we eat, we need to concentrate more
on the type of fat we take in. There are three different types of fats:
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
35


===PAGE 50===
saturated, monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated. Saturated fats
mostly come from dairy products, red meats, poultry, and many
processed foods. Saturated fats also occur in coconut oil and palm oil.
We need a certain amount of saturated fat in our diets to produce cho-
lesterol, which is an important component of cell membranes as well
as acting as a precursor to all of the steroid hormones (e.g., preg-
nenolone, progesterone, cortisol, and aldosterone), each of which has
a distinct function within the body. For example, progesterone and
pregnenolone have antioxidant, antiseizure, antispasm, anticlotting,
anticancer, promemory, and promyelination functions, and are helpful
in regulating women’s menstrual cycles.
Monounsaturated fat, found in oils such as canola and olive oil and
also in avocados, has been called the “good fat,” which in part is true.
Eating sufficient amounts of monounsaturated fat has been shown to
decrease LDL cholesterol, the “bad” cholesterol.
Let’s talk for a moment about canola oil, which is currently being
touted as a “healthy” oil. Canola oil, which comes from the seed of the
rape plant (it is known as rapeseed oil in other countries), is poisonous
to many living things. It is used as an insect repellent and was the source
of the chemical warfare agent mustard gas, which was banned after it
was shown to blister the lungs and skin of many soldiers. The name
“canola” comes from the fact that rapeseed oil was modified in a Cana-
dian laboratory into a lower-acid oil presumed safe for human con-
sumption (the word “canola” stands for Canadian oil low acid). The
Canadian government paid the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) a large sum of money to have canola oil placed on the “Gener-
ally Recognized as Safe” (GRAS) list. However, studies of the effects of
canola oil on lab animals show problems related to the heart, adrenals,
kidneys, and thyroid. No human studies were performed before canola
oil was widely promoted in the United States.
When baking, I used to use organic butter and canola oil. I have
now switched for all of my baking to a blend of organic butter and
organic coconut oil. Coconut oil and butter, because they are saturated
fats, are stable in high temperatures and remain stable for the extended
time needed for baking. The damage done by oxidation of fats usually
occurs when heating a relatively unstable fat such as a monounsatu-
rated or polyunsaturated fat. Using a monounsaturated fat such as
36
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 51===
canola oil in baking or cooking leaves the body more susceptible to
oxidative damage. An unsaturated fat, when heated, has the potential
to convert into a trans fatty acid, which the body is unable to metabo-
lize. (Trans fatty acids are discussed in more detail below.)
Oxidative damage to the body increases the risk of forming athero-
sclerotic plagues in the arteries, which in turn increase the risk for heart
disease. Because of the increased risk of oxidative damage that occurs
when heating a monounsaturated fat to high temperatures, it is impor-
tant to make sure you avoid heating olive oil too high when cooking
with it. If you are stir-frying or otherwise cooking at an elevated tem-
perature, use coconut oil instead. Because coconut oil is a shorter-chain
saturated fat, it is more easily metabolized by the body than many other
saturated fats. I have used coconut oil in place of olive oil for stir-fries,
baking, and prolonged heating with great results and no difference in
taste. Coconut oil is solid at room temperature. Studies reveal that
coconut oil stored at room temperature for over one year still shows
no evidence of rancidity. Studies have also suggested that using coconut
oil regularly may reduce total cholesterol levels. Individuals living in
regions where coconut oil is eaten regularly have generally lower cho-
lesterol levels than individuals living in the United States who eat the
typical American diet of processed foods and processed oils.
Essential Fatty Acids
Polyunsaturated fats are made up of omega fatty acids. Omega-3 and
omega-6 fatty acids are the essential fatty acids. They are termed “essen-
tial” because the human body is unable to produce them and therefore
we must obtain them through diet. In ancient times the fat content of
our diet was more balanced between omega-3 fats and omega-6 fats.
Since our diet has changed to include more processed and refined foods,
the ratio has become significantly disproportionate. We typically con-
sume twenty to twenty-five times more omega-6 than omega-3 fatty
acids. In addition, the fat content of our diets consists largely of satu-
rated and hydrogenated fats (hydrogenated fats are discussed later).
Omega-6 fatty acids include oils such as borage oil and evening
primrose oil. Most nuts and seeds contain a combination of both types
of oils. Omega-3 fatty acids come from cold-water fish such as salmon,
tuna, sardines, halibut, and mackerel, as well as flaxseeds, other seeds,
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
37


===PAGE 52===
some nuts, and some legumes. Omega-3 fatty acids should be consumed
at least three to four times per week. Some symptoms associated with
a deficiency of omega-3 fatty acids are severe allergies, inflammatory
conditions, dry hair and skin, brittle nails, eczema or other skin rashes,
and bumps on the backs of the upper arms (keratosis pilaris). Essential
fatty acids help to promote a healthier nervous system, including
improved brain function, mood, memory, and nerve conduction; help
improve lipid profiles; are antiatherosclerotic; help promote healthy
skin; and support proper immune function.
Ways to supplement include consuming flaxseed oil, cod liver oil,
evening primrose oil, essential fatty acid capsules, freshly ground
flaxseeds, pumpkin seeds, sesame seeds, and sunflower seeds. The oils
should not be heated before ingesting. Flaxseeds should be ground
rather than used whole because grinding them releases their fatty acids.
Eating them whole gives you the fiber benefits but less of the fatty acid
content. Grinding flaxseeds fresh daily (in a clean coffee grinder) is
important because after a few days the oil content of ground seeds is
no longer fresh.
Hydrogenated Oils
Hydrogenated oils, which are manufactured to make liquid oils like
canola and soybean oil solid at room temperature in order to give baked
goods a longer shelf life, are used in approximately forty thousand food
products in the United States, according to Margo Wootan at the Cen-
ter for Science in the Public Interest. Hydrogenated oils (or partially
hydrogenated oils) are contained in General Mills Total Bran Flakes,
Ritz Crackers, Rold Gold Pretzels, and Nabisco Graham Crackers. They
are even used in seemingly innocuous foods like some breads, mar-
garines, and peanut butter, and also in some low-fat “health foods,” like
Tiger’s Milk energy bars. Hydrogenated oils give packaged cookies and
crackers the crispy, buttery taste we have come to expect, and most of
the processed foods we eat wouldn’t taste the same without them.
Hydrogenated oils are manmade fats that the body has a limited
ability to recognize, break down, or utilize. Why are they called “hydro-
genated”? Certain oils are processed in a way that adds hydrogen atoms
to their chemical structure. This “hydrogenation” process allows sci-
entists to harden oils that are normally liquid at room temperature to
38
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 53===
make margarine and other butter alternatives. The new fat is also called
a “trans fatty acid” or a “trans fat.” According to the Journal of Clini-
cal Nutrition, studies from Harvard University in 2004 revealed that
trans fats may increase levels of inflammation in the body. The same
researchers also found that trans fats may worsen the inflammation
already present in people with heart failure.
Trans fats, when used to replace healthy fats in the diet, could ren-
der several of the body’s vital systems defective. If we accumulate
enough of these “indigestible fats” to overload the system, the risk for
cancer and other noncommunicable diseases could potentially increase.
According to Donald Yance, author of Herbal Medicine, Healing,
and Cancer, in 1977 the World Health Organization sent out an alert
to all nations stating that continuing to use hydrogenated fats would
cause detrimental health effects in the future. Do you know that not
one nation listened? Today, chronic diseases—such as cancer, diabetes,
and other cardiovascular diseases (primarily heart disease and stroke)—
are among the most prevalent, costly, and preventable of all health
problems. Seven of every 10 Americans who die each year, die of a
chronic disease.
I am not saying that hydrogenated oils are the only cause of chronic
disease; I am saying that they play a part in the many lifestyle compo-
nents that seem to have increased our risk for chronic conditions. What
we do know is that hydrogenated oils promote inflammation by stimu-
lating the increase of inflammation-promoting prostaglandins, as men-
tioned earlier.
Also as mentioned earlier, any oils or fats that are cooked at very
high temperatures convert to trans fats. Be cautious when stir-frying
that you avoid using a temperature that is too high. If the oil begins
smoking, the heat is too high. Also, the oil content in anything that is
deep fried and then left to sit in the fryer, such as in fast food restau-
rants, becomes a trans fatty acid and should be avoided. Finally, in
order to avoid changing the fat configuration of eggs, it is best to cook
them slowly with low heat. According to Every Woman’s Book, by
Paavo Airola, N.D., use the following procedure to prepare scrambled
eggs: Separate them, placing the yolks to the side. The whites are to be
poached, removed from the heat, and added to the raw yolks. Scram-
ble the whites and yolks briefly before serving.
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
39


===PAGE 54===
Carbohydrates
Eat mostly complex carbohydrates that are unprocessed, unrefined, and
as close to their whole, natural state as possible. Whole oats, whole rye,
millet, whole-wheat pasta, bulgur, barley, legumes (such as pinto beans,
lentils, navy beans, lima beans, split peas), fresh vegetables, brown rice,
and sweet potatoes are good sources of complex carbohydrates. Whole
grains are a great source of B vitamins, and legumes eaten with grains
are a great source of complete protein. Dark-green, leafy vegetables are
an excellent source of calcium and zinc.
Simple carbohydrates, such as those found in refined, processed,
and sweetened foods, should be limited or excluded from the diet. They
include sources of sugars, fruits, white flour, pastries, doughnuts, cook-
ies, soda pop, caffeinated beverages, white rice, cereals made with sugar
or enriched grains, and other products whose ingredient list says
“wheat” but does not include the word “whole” in front of it. Simple
carbohydrates raise blood sugar levels quickly and cause the body to
increase insulin production, which triggers cholesterol synthesis. There-
fore, increased insulin output caused by excessive amounts of sugar in
the diet increases cholesterol levels, as well as promoting fat produc-
tion and fat storage. Simply put, simple carbohydrates exacerbate dia-
betes, obesity, high cholesterol, and poor lipid profiles.
Fiber
Fiber is not a specific nutrient, but it is very important for digestive
health. It acts as a bulking agent to help pass the stool through the intes-
tine. Inadequate amounts of fiber in the diet can lead to digestive com-
plaints such as constipation and, less often, diarrhea. Fiber also helps
to increase transit time to insure that more toxins aren’t absorbed into
the bloodstream because the stool has remained in the rectum for an
extended period of time. Fiber in the diet can help fend off food aller-
gies, improve the body’s ability to utilize nutrients, and keep the whole
digestive tract clean. The National Institutes of Health recommends that
adults consume 35 grams of fiber per day. I recommend at least that
much, but 40–50 grams is even better.
Fiber can be found in fresh vegetables, fruits, legumes, and grains.
Ground flaxseeds can be a great source of fiber, protein, and omega-3
essential fatty acids. I suggest eating two tablespoons of freshly ground
40
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 55===
flaxseeds daily. Store your seeds in a jar in the refrigerator, pull the jar
out every morning, measure two tablespoons into a clean coffee grinder,
grind, and then add them to your cereal or a salad, or mix them with
a little water and drink them. Another creative way to get flaxseeds into
your diet is to roll them into a ball with almond butter and honey (see
the recipe for Sun Candies in the section “Sweet Things”).
Eat More of These Foods
In the last chapter I listed foods to avoid when following the anti-
inflammation diet. Now let’s discuss items that are positive to include
in the diet because they help to decrease inflammation. Here’s a list:
 Essential fatty acids found in cold-water, oily fish such as salmon,
mackerel, tuna (limit to 2 servings per month), sardines, halibut;
also, oils extracted from these fish
 Pineapple, because of its content of bromelain, which decreases
inflammation
 Fruits and vegetables, except those listed in the table below
 Garlic, ginger, and turmeric
 Most nuts and seeds, except peanuts
 Flaxseed oil; olive oil if not heated too high
 Filtered water, in the amount of half of your body weight in fluid
ounces daily (one cup equals eight fluid ounces)
The Anti-Inflammation Diet: A Summary
Posting a copy of this summary on the refrigerator has been helpful for
many of my patients.
 Try to eat only organically grown foods to decrease your expo-
sure to pesticides. Furthermore, according to a fact sheet pro-
duced by The Soil Association of the U.K. that summarizes an
article by James Cleeton appearing in the journal Coronary and
Diabetic Care in the UK in 2004, organic foods reduce the
amount of toxic chemicals ingested, are not genetically modi-
fied, reduce the amount of food additives and colorings, and
increase the amount of beneficial vitamins, minerals, EFAs, and
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
41


===PAGE 56===
antioxidants consumed, which are used by the body to fight can-
cer and chronic disease.
 There is no preset restriction on the amount of food you can eat,
and there is no need to count calories. Pay attention to your
body’s own satiety signals. Eat when you’re hungry, and stop
eating when you’re satisfied.
 The specific foods listed below are only examples of foods to
eat, so experiment.
 Try to plan meals with approximately the following caloric com-
position: 40 percent carbohydrates, 30 percent protein, and 30
percent healthy fats.
 Do not eat any one food more than five times per week.
 Plan your meals ahead of time.
 Try to find at least ten recipes from this book that you enjoy.
42
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Food Category
Vegetables: Vegetables are
classified progressively accord-
ing to carbohydrate content.
Those in group 1 have the
least amount of carbohydrate;
those in group 4 have the
most. Eat mostly lower-carbo-
hydrate vegetables (those in
groups 1 and 2).
Lightly steaming vegetables
improves the utilization or
availability of the nutrients,
allowing the GI mucosa to
repair itself. Minimize your
intake of raw vegetables,
except in salads. Include at
least 1–2 servings of green
vegetables per day, though
even more is preferred.
Foods to Eat
Group 1: Asparagus, bean
sprouts, beet greens, broccoli,
red and green cabbage, cauli-
flower, celery, Swiss chard,
cucumber, endive, lettuce
(green, red, romaine, mixed
greens), mustard and dande-
lion greens, radishes, spinach,
and watercress
Group 2: String beans, beets,
bok choy, brussels sprouts,
chives, collards, eggplant,
kale, kohlrabi, leeks, onion,
parsley, red pepper, pumpkin,
rutabagas, turnips, and zuc-
chini
Group 3: Artichokes, parsnips,
green peas, winter squash,
carrots
Group 4: Yams and sweet
potatoes
Foods to Avoid
Tomatoes;
potatoes


===PAGE 57===
Food Category
Grains: Include 1–2 cups of
cooked grains per day unless
you desire to lose weight.
Legumes: Soak legumes
overnight and cook them
slowly the next day.
Seafood: Wild (versus
farmed) deep-sea, cold-water
fish are an excellent source of
essential fatty acids and
should be eaten 3–4 times
per week. Poach, bake, or
broil the fish.
Meat: Eating protein with
every meal helps to regulate
and maintain steady blood
sugar and energy levels.
Spices and herbs
Fruits: Eat only 1–2 servings
of any fruit per day. Try to eat
mostly fruits from the lower-
carbohydrate categories
(Groups 1 and 2).
Sweeteners: Use sweeten-
ers only occasionally
Foods to Eat
Amaranth, spelt, barley, buck-
wheat, millet, oatmeal,
quinoa, basmati or brown
rice, rye, and teff
Rice crackers and Wasa brand
rye crackers are also okay.
Split peas, lentils, kidney
beans, pinto beans, black
beans, garbanzo beans, fer-
mented soybeans (tempeh or
miso), mung beans, and
adzuki beans
Wild salmon, cod, haddock,
halibut, mackerel, sardines,
tuna, trout, and summer
flounder
Meat only (i.e., not the skin)
of organic, free-range chicken
and turkey
Wild game, venison, and elk
Organic, free-range lamb and
buffalo
Use any favorite herbs and
spices to enhance the flavor
of your food.
Group 1: Cantaloupe,
rhubarb, melons, strawberries
Group 2: Apricots, blackber-
ries, cranberries, papayas,
peaches, plums, raspberries,
kiwis
Group 3: Apples, blueberries,
cherries, grapes, pears,
pineapples, pomegranates
Group 4: Bananas, figs,
prunes
Pure maple syrup, brown rice
syrup, raw honey, agave
syrup, stevia
Foods to Avoid
All wheat products, including
breads, cereals, whole-wheat
flour, white flour, and pasta
that is made from wheat
Tofu can cause reactions in
some people. Experiment with
both including it and eliminat-
ing it from the diet.
Shellfish, including shrimp,
crab, lobster, clams, and mus-
sels
Pork
Conventionally raised beef
(small amounts of organic,
grass-fed beef are okay)
Citrus fruits (lemon is okay)
Limit your intake of dried
fruits, and eliminate them if
you are diabetic.
Absolutely no sugar,
NutraSweet, or any other
sweetener is allowed.
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
43


===PAGE 58===
Lifestyle Choices
Our current home and work habits often fail to allow for a regular meal
schedule. People’s busy lives may prevent their caloric intake from being
evenly distributed throughout the day. Dinner, often eaten very late and
thus soon followed by several hours of sleep, is typically people’s biggest
meal. When we should be digesting the food we just ate, we are often
sleeping, and during sleep our metabolic function is sluggish.
Americans’ fast-paced lives have also supported on-the-go meals
such as fast food and prepared meals, and quick blood-sugar fixes such
as candy bars and other processed sweets. According to the book Fast
Food Nation, by Eric Schlosser, fast food accounts for 40 percent of
Americans’ dietary intake. Researchers from Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, a teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School, conducted a
study published in the International Journal of Cancer in 2006, reveal-
44
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Food Category
Butter and oils: Mix 1
pound organic butter with 1
cup extra-virgin olive oil to use
as a spread. Store in refrigera-
tor.
Eggs and dairy products
Nuts and seeds: Eat them
raw or grind and add them to
steamed vegetables, cooked
grains, salads, cereals, etc.
Beverages
Miscellaneous
Foods to Eat
A small amount of organic
butter is okay.
Use olive oil for cooking,
coconut oil for baking, and nut
or seed oils for salads.
Organic eggs
Flax, pumpkin, sesame, sun-
flower seeds
Most nuts and nut butters
Minimum of ½ your weight in
fluid ounces per day of filtered
water
Small amount of rice, oat,
almond, or soy milk
Herbal teas (substitute for cof-
fee and juice)
Foods to Avoid
Hydrogenated oils, partially
hydrogenated oils (trans fats)
Avoid overheating oils, which
in the process can convert to
trans fats.
Dairy products, including
yogurt, cheese, and animal
milks
Commercial eggs
Peanuts and peanut butter
Coffee, soda, juice, caffein-
ated teas, alcohol
Corn products
Processed foods
Fried foods


===PAGE 59===
ing that preschoolers who regularly ate French fries had an increased
risk for breast cancer. In fact, researcher Dr. Karin Michels and col-
leagues estimated that a woman’s risk of breast cancer in later life
increased by 27 percent for each additional serving of French fries per
week that she ate as a preschooler. These foods are not the best-qual-
ity fuel we can feed to our bodily processes.
Our children have an even greater need for energy-giving foods to
promote growth and good health. My views of childhood development
and nutrition were enhanced and enlightened by attending a seminar
in Portland, Oregon, offered by Dr. Gerard Gueniot, a medical doctor
from France. As he states, “children under the age of four do not have
the same digestive capability as adults do; therefore it is a crime to be
feeding these toxic-filled, processed foods to young children.” Children
(as well as adults) benefit immensely from adopting a healthy daily diet
of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, nuts, seeds, and a moderate amount
of high-quality protein. Parents need to set the example for children,
and aware individuals need to set the example for the rest of society.
People who understand the importance of a healthy, balanced diet are
responsible for teaching the rest of the population how important nutri-
ents are in promoting health and fighting disease. What better way to
teach people than by example? It is especially important to share our
knowledge with the children who are around us. After all, they are the
next leaders of our world.
Mealtime Recommendations
Here are my suggestions for enhancing the quality of mealtimes. Spend
time with your food. Do not do anything else such as watching TV,
driving, or talking on the phone. Have a quiet, relaxed atmosphere in
which to enjoy your food. Reflect upon the energy the food holds and
what it is giving to you. Do not drink anything while eating. If you must
have something, it should be limited to small sips of water.
Proper chewing is an important part of digestion and should be
something that you concentrate on doing during each meal. If you fail
to chew your food thoroughly, digestion is not properly initiated and
your body will less adequately absorb important nutrients. I suggest
that people chew their food at least nineteen times before swallowing.
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
45


===PAGE 60===
This ensures that a nearly liquidified product will enter the stomach for
easier absorption.
It is best to eat your meals at regularly scheduled times. Eating at
the same times each day will establish a pattern with your endocrine
system, helping to facilitate digestion at those times. Do not eat late at
night, when your metabolism is getting ready to rest.
Make sure to eat breakfast. Eating a whole-grain breakfast has been
related to a 15 percent reduction in the risk for insulin resistance, a syn-
drome that can lead to type-II diabetes, weight gain, and cardiovascu-
lar complications. Refined “kid’s” cereals, breads, pastries, and other
carbohydrates typically consumed for breakfast will not have the same
effect as whole grains. Eating all meals, starting with breakfast, is
important to maintaining a revved-up metabolism throughout the day.
A Few More Suggestions
The purpose of this book is to act as a guide to help you learn to cook
healthily. It is not intended to be something you have to use each time
you cook. My goal is to teach you how to cook, how to learn from your
mistakes, how to experiment, and how to learn from those positive acci-
dents that create new meal ideas. Learning to cook is a process of devel-
oping your skills. Put a little pizzazz into your meals. Experiment. Be
creative. You can use many of the recipes in this book as a template for
even greater meals. If you are lacking one or two ingredients, replace
them with something you do have. I have included some simple begin-
ning recipes that can go in many different directions. Don’t be afraid
to mix vegetables or grains with fruit. Adding a small amount of fruit
to a green salad can be a refreshing treat on a summer day.
Experiment with herbs and spices. Each week, choose one new sea-
soning to play with and learn about. Look up its medicinal properties,
and be appreciative for its actions in your body. If you don’t feel com-
fortable experimenting with a recipe in the beginning, then follow the
directions exactly and think of how you can make it better the next
time. Maybe you like more spice or less spice. Cook to please yourself
and, of course, anyone else dining with you.
Cooking healthily can take very little time. Although it is a passion
of mine to spend hours in the kitchen cutting vegetables and preparing
46
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 61===
meals, I also have a busy health-care practice, a husband, and a child
to tend to. I am no stranger to “quick meals.” Thinking ahead of time
helps to make even quick meals nutritious and full of life-giving energy.
One time-saving hint is to chop vegetables ahead of time—for exam-
ple, when you get home from the grocery store. If I know that I will be
preparing a few different meals that require chopped onion, I will chop
two to three onions and store them in an airtight container until I need
them.
As with anything, the more you practice, the better cook you will
become. Host weekly or monthly potlucks with friends and family to
share and learn recipes. Most of my inspiration for cooking has come
from my fellow naturopathic colleagues, including my husband. It is
important to have support when changing your diet. Get your family
members and friends involved, and most of all, have fun.
The Anti-Inflammation Diet
47


===PAGE 62===
CHAPTER 5
How to Use This Book
I have tried to make this book very easy to use and the recipes easy to
follow. Some recipes may include foods that are allergenic for some indi-
viduals, but I have made suggestions for how to substitute other foods
in those cases. In fact, nearly every recipe offers ideas for substitutions.
In addition, a substitutions table appears in the Appendix that will help
you when you want to do some experimenting with ingredients.
Besides offering substitution ideas, each recipe contains a tidbit of
health information about the recipe or about one of the ingredients. It
is a bonus to be able to know how you are improving your health each
time you prepare a recipe. Most of the recipes are easy to follow and
even appetizing to most kids. The key for children is introducing them
to healthful ways of eating when they’re young and keeping them away
from processed foods and sugars. There is always a substitute for sug-
ary items.
Converting Yourself and Your Family
As you have probably learned, children, and even some adults, can be
finicky eaters. Drastically changing your family’s diet can be difficult
and can meet with resistance. In order to sneak healthy foods to fam-
ily members, you must master the art of adding valuable, life-sustain-
ing nutrients to each meal. It can be as simple as adding flaxseeds and
other types of seeds to baked goods. Vegetables should be eaten regu-
larly, so if you’re the primary meal-preparer in your household, make
it a goal to “slip them in” as often as possible. According to one of my
favorite cookbooks, Jane Kinderlehrer’s Confessions of a Sneaky
Organic Cook, the key to sneaky cookery is having a mini food proces-
sor or blender. I would add to that list a coffee grinder as well.
Here are some examples of how to include vegetables without your
family knowing it. Steam some vegetables, “for yourself” if anyone
48



===PAGE 63===
asks, and purée them in the blender when no one is looking. Add the
puréed vegetables to your meal by using them to thicken and flavor
many sauces, soups, salad dressings, chicken or tuna salads, veggie
burgers, turkey burgers, meatballs, meatloaf, and more. You can add
grated zucchini or carrots to cookies, muffins, or pancake batter. Make
sure all of your soups contain vegetables. If your younger kids won’t
eat them, purée them first and then add them to the soup. Be creative
and experiment, but don’t overdo it at first or your family will find out
that what they’re eating is not just sauce or soup or whatever.
Be Prepared
An important aspect of being a sneaky cook is being prepared. During
the weekend, plan meals for the whole week if you can. Know when
you and your children like to snack, and at those times have ready-
made snacks to put out on the end tables or on the kitchen counter. As
your kids come into the house looking for a snack, they will naturally
graze first on what is available and in sight. Some of my favorite snacks
are celery or apples with almond butter, nuts, seeds, fruit cut into easy-
to-eat pieces, and rice crackers with avocado or hummus.
Modifying Recipes
Learning how to change recipes is another important part of anti-
inflammatory cooking. Acquiring this skill takes a little practice, but
once you have mastered it you can modify almost any recipe (refer to
the Appendix for substitution ideas).
The typical cookie recipe looks somewhat like this:
3 cups white flour
3/4 cup brown sugar
3/4 cup white sugar
2 eggs
1 cup butter or shortening
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon baking soda
1 bag chocolate chips
How to Use This Book
49


===PAGE 64===
With a little practice it becomes easy to substitute alternate flours
and sweeteners. Your new recipe may look something like this:
1½ cups spelt flour
1½ cups rice or garbanzo flour
3/4 cup honey
½ cup organic butter
½ teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon aluminum-free baking soda
2 organic eggs (or 1 mashed banana with 3 tablespoons ground
flaxseeds soaked in ¼ cup water overnight)
1 cup nuts and/or seeds
½ cup cut-up fruit such as apricots or apples
If you look at the new recipe, you’ll see that we have cut the but-
ter and sugar in half and have added some nuts, seeds, and fruit instead
of chocolate chips. You may increase the amount of butter slightly if
you want your cookie to flatten more. This new cookie contains some
protein to curb the appetite and stabilize blood sugar. We won’t have
to eat as many of these cookies to fill up as we would the cookies from
the old recipe. If you are craving chocolate, you can add carob powder
in place of the chocolate chips. Adding cinnamon will help maintain
balanced blood glucose. Or you can add coconut. See how fun this can
be? You can experiment with adding many new ingredients. I add zuc-
chini to my cookies, and it keeps them moist for weeks, in which case,
they should be refrigerated.
Helpful Items to Have in the Kitchen
You don’t have to go to the grocery store and purchase everything on
this list. Think of it as a template for things you may want to keep on
hand to be able to follow many of the recipes in this book.
1. Extra-virgin, cold-pressed olive oil (purchase only oils that have
been refined without using heat—e.g., “cold-pressed,” “expeller-
pressed”—to avoid the possibility of their having been converted
into trans fats through the heating process)
2. Organic coconut oil for baking
3. Onions
50
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 65===
4. Garlic
5. Raw honey or agave syrup
6. Brown rice syrup
7. Pure maple syrup
8. Nonwheat flours such as spelt, oat, quinoa, rye, barley, rice
9. Lemons
10. Rice vinegar, balsamic vinegar, tarragon vinegar, organic apple
cider vinegar
11. Dried herbs and spices, e.g., basil, oregano, thyme, garlic pow-
der, sea salt, black pepper, cumin, curry, cinnamon, turmeric,
mustard seeds, mustard powder, nutmeg, carob powder, and any
others you like
12. Filtered water
13. Nuts and seeds
14. Fresh fruits
15. Fresh vegetables
16. Brown rice, quinoa, oats, amaranth, other grains
17. Almond butter
18. Pure maple syrup
19. Milk substitutes such as rice milk, oat milk, soy milk, almond
milk
20. Beans and legumes, canned or dried
21. Large skillet to stir-fry vegetables
22. Large pot for sauces and soups
23. Two-quart saucepan for cooking rice and other grains
24. Laughter, a good appetite, and the courage to discover new
tastes!
Sample Menus
The two tables below outline sample eating plans for the summer and
winter months respectively. They are intended only as examples; inclu-
sion in one table or the other does not mean that a particular food
should only be eaten in that specific season. Suggestions for physical
activity are also included.
How to Use This Book
51


===PAGE 66===
Sample Anti-Inflammatory Menus for the Summer Months
Breakfast
Midmorning
snack
Lunch
Afternoon
snack
Dinner
Monday 
Breakfast 
Smoothie
Can of salmon
with rice crackers
Beet and Bean
Salad (made the
night before)
Nuts and seeds
Cucumber Salad;
Baked Tofu;
Steamed Vegeta-
bles
Tuesday 
Protein Power
Breakfast
Rice protein bar
Green salad with
avocado and nuts
1–2 soft-boiled
eggs
10-Minute Avo-
cado Soup; Fresh
green salad
Wednesday 
Breakfast 
Smoothie
Nuts and seeds
Raw Beet Soup
(made the night
before)
Baba Ghanoush
with rice crackers
Turkey Meatloaf;
Spicy Honey
Lemon Salad with
dandelion greens
Thursday
2 soft-boiled eggs;
1 serving of fruit
Celery with
almond butter
Quinoa Vegetable
Salad (made the
night before)
Avocado Tuna 
Salad
Chicken Curry
Made Simple
(chicken baked the
night before)
Friday 
Granola with milk
substitute; 1 serv-
ing of fruit
Apples with
almond butter
Carrot Beet Salad
(made the night
before)
Nuts and seeds
Strawberry
Spinach Salad
with Blackened
Salmon
Saturday
Broccoli and Olive
Frittata
Guacamole with
rice crackers
Tangy Coconut
Soup; brown rice
Sun Candies
Seared Tuna over
Raw Vegetables
Sunday
Wheat-Free Pan-
cakes
Hummus with raw
vegetables
Cold Asian Noo-
dles with Smoked
Salmon
1 slice of The All-
Forgiving Banana
Bread
Grilled chicken,
turkey, or fish with
Vegetable Mari-
nade for Grilling
52
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Include these
things daily:
Seeds
Water
Movement
2 tablespoons ground flaxseeds
½ your weight in fl. oz. per day (do not drink while eating)
30–45 minutes walking, exercising, moving outdoors


===PAGE 67===
How to Use This Book
53
Breakfast
Midmorning
snack
Lunch
Afternoon
snack
Dinner
Monday
Quickest Oatmeal
You’ll Ever Eat
Nuts and seeds
Avocado Tuna 
Salad over bed of
fresh greens
Almond butter
with celery
Simple Stir Fry
with your favorite
grain
Tuesday 
Protein Power
Breakfast
Seeds; 1 serving of
fruit
Leftover Veggie
Burgers (made the
night before from
leftovers)
2 soft-boiled eggs
Stuffed Chicken
Breast with
“Peanut” Curry
Sauce; Scrump-
tious Green Beans
Wednesday 
Quickest Oatmeal
with frozen berries
and honey
Rice protein bar
Curry Chicken 
Salad with crack-
ers or salad greens
(chicken baked the
night before)
Almond butter
with apples
Blackened
Salmon; Tasty
Lemon Vinaigrette
Salad
Thursday
Granola with milk
substitute; 1 serv-
ing of fruit
Can of salmon
with rice crackers
Mexican Salad
(make the dress-
ing the night
before )
Nuts and seeds
Nutty Onion Soup;
Steamed Vegeta-
bles
Friday 
Quickest Oatmeal,
any way you like it
2 soft-boiled eggs
Curried Quinoa
Salad (made the
night before)
Avocado with rice
crackers
Greek night: Bar-
becued Kafta,
Not-So-Greek Sal-
ad, Hummus, and
fresh vegetables or
rice crackers
Saturday
Mexican Morning
Eggs
Hummus with cel-
ery sticks
Cream of Carrot
and Ginger Soup
1 slice of Zucchini
Bread
Winter Soup; Rice
crackers
Sunday
Tofu Scramble
Sun Candies
Stuffed Mush-
rooms; Small
green salad
Italian Carrot 
Salad
Breaded Red
Snapper with
Mango Salsa; Gar-
lic Bean Salad;
Sweet Potato
“Fries”
Sample Anti-Inflammatory Menus for the Winter Months
Include these
things daily: 
Seeds
Water
Movement
2 tablespoons ground flaxseeds
½ your weight in fl. oz. per day (do not drink while eating)
30–45 minutes walking, exercising, moving outdoors


===PAGE 68===
“The doctor of the future will give no medication, but will interest
his patients in the care of the human frame, diet and in the cause
and prevention of disease.”
THOMAS A. EDISON

Volume Equivalents
1½ teaspoons = ½ tablespoon
1 tablespoon = 3 teaspoons
2 tablespoons = 1 ounce = 1/8 cup
1 cup = 8 ounces (16 tablespoons)
1 pint = 2 cups = 16 ounces
1 quart = 2 pints = 4 cups = 32 ounces
1 U.S. gallon = 4 quarts = 16 cups = 128 ounces
Converting U.S. to Metric Measurements
1 ounce = 30 grams
1 teaspoon = 4.9 milliliters
1 cup (16 tablespoons/8 ounces) = 240 milliliters
4 quarts (1 U.S. gallon/128 ounces) = 3.8 liters
teaspoons x 4.93 = milliliters (ml)
tablespoons x 14.79 = milliliters
fluid ounces x 29.57 = milliliters
cups x 236.59 = milliliters
pints x 473.18 = milliliters
quarts x 946.36 = milliliters
U.S. gallons x 3.785 = liters
54



===PAGE 69===
Recipes


===PAGE 70===
Appetizers, Side Dishes,
Seasonings, and Spreads
Asparagus à la Sweet Lemon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Baba Ghanoush  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Basil Pesto  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Cashew Cabbage  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Delicious Green Beans with Garlic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
“French Fries”  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Guacamole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Nut ’n’ Curry Hummus  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Lemon Vegetable Rice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Mango Salsa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Mashed “Potatoes” (Mashed Jerusalem Artichokes)
69
Milk Thistle Seasoning Salt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Olive Oil–Butter Spread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
“Peanut” Sauce  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Poppy Seed Rice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Rosemary Squash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Salad Rolls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Scrumptious Green Beans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Simple and Delectable Beets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Steamed Vegetables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Stuffed Grape Leaves (Dolmades)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Stuffed Mushrooms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Sweet Potato “Fries”  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Vegetable Marinade for Grilling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88


===PAGE 71===
Asparagus à la Sweet Lemon
PER SERVING: 128.4 CALORIES ~ 2.9 G PROTEIN ~ 6.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.6 G FIBER ~ 11.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 293.7 MG SODIUM
Lemon is a great flavor to add to most dishes, and the nutmeg adds a
surprising sweetness to the asparagus.
2 bunches asparagus (about 1 pound)
Juice of 1 medium lemon
3 tablespoons olive oil
½ teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
1 tablespoon ground cashews (for garnish)
Wash the asparagus, cut off the ends, and steam until the stems are
cooked but still a little firm.
Mix together in a bowl lemon juice, oil, sea salt, pepper, and nut-
meg. Arrange the asparagus on a serving dish and drizzle with the lemon
juice mixture.
Garnish with ground cashews and serve immediately.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You could try this recipe with green beans.
Healthy Tidbit
My parents have asparagus growing wild, and I love to graze on it (it’s
even tasty raw). Asparagus is the primary Ayurvedic root for strengthen-
ing female hormones. It also may promote fertility, increase lactation,
and relieve menstrual pain. Asparagus can reduce phlegm and mucus,
ease constipation, and is high in the powerful antioxidant glutathione. It
has also been used in the treatment of heart failure, edema, rheumatism,
and gout. To keep your
asparagus fresh after pur-
chase, stand it up in two
inches of cold water in the
refrigerator.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
57
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
62.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
30.1 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
2.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
70.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
22.7 mg
Folate (total)
53.2 µg
Zinc
0.7 mg
Vitamin C
10.7 mg
Potassium
257.6 mg


===PAGE 72===
Baba Ghanoush
PER SERVING: 101.3 CALORIES ~ 3.2 G PROTEIN ~ 8.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.8 G FIBER ~ 7.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 200.4 MG SODIUM
I used to go to this little Middle Eastern deli on my lunch break from
medical school, and it is there that I learned to love baba ghanoush. A
crowd pleaser, it is great for dipping and as a side to any meat dish.
1 large eggplant or 2 small eggplants
¼ cup plus 1 heaping tablespoon tahini (sesame seed butter, available
in most natural-food stores)
½–1 teaspoon salt
1–2 garlic cloves, minced
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
1/8 teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon black pepper
Paprika for garnish
Parsley for garnish
Preheat the oven to 350° F. Leaving the eggplant whole and unpeeled,
bake it on a baking sheet until soft, about 30 minutes. (For a smoother
baba ghanoush, remove the peel from the eggplant before blending.)
Allow to cool to room temperature.
Cut eggplant(s) open, remove as many seeds as you can, and cut the
remaining flesh into cubes. Blend all ingredients in blender until smooth.
Garnish with parsley and paprika, and serve with rice crackers, non-
wheat bread, or dipping vegetables such as carrots and celery.
Serves 6.
Healthy Tidbit
Paprika, a relative of cayenne pepper, is ground from a sweet pepper in
the Solanaceae (nightshade) family. It is used often in Hungarian cooking
and has been used medicinally to prevent seasickness.
58
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
8.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
28.7 mg
Niacin
1.3 mg
Iron
0.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
126.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
25.7 mg
Folate (total)
33.5 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
5.1 mg
Potassium
280.1mg


===PAGE 73===
Basil Pesto
PER SERVING: 330.6 CALORIES ~ 2.7 G PROTEIN ~ 4.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.1 G FIBER ~ 35.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 4.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 146.8 MG SODIUM
This versatile pesto can be used on rice crackers, on nonwheat pasta, in
egg dishes, in salads, or with anything else your taste buds can dream up.
Spread it on a spelt pizza crust, or substitute it in any dish that calls for a
tomato-based marinara sauce. You can double or triple the recipe and
freeze the pesto in jars for future use.
4 cups fresh basil leaves, washed and patted dry
½ cup extra-virgin olive oil
3–4 cloves of garlic
1/3 cup pine nuts
¼ teaspoon salt
¼ teaspoon pepper (optional)
Process all ingredients in a food processor until smooth.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Pesto does not need to be made with basil; you can use cilantro, spinach,
or parsley. You could even do a combination of two different herbs for
variety. For example, use 2 cups basil with 2 cups spinach. You could
also try using different nuts, such as walnuts or pecans.
Healthy Tidbit
Pine nuts give lubrication to the lungs and intestines. They are a great
source of protein, can aid in coughs, and help to decrease constipation.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
59
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
163.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
71.6 mg
Niacin
0.9 mg
Iron
2.2 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
98.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
63.7 mg
Folate (total)
31.1 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
8.4 mg
Potassium
273.6 mg


===PAGE 74===
Cashew Cabbage
PER SERVING: 177.9 CALORIES ~ 6.6 G PROTEIN ~ 17.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.5 G FIBER ~ 10.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.9 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 112.0 MG SODIUM
A version of this recipe has been in my family for generations. The
cashews make the flavor very surprising and appealing.
1 small head of cabbage, chopped
2 stalks of celery
½ medium onion, chopped
Sea salt to taste
Pepper to taste
½ cup rice milk or soy milk (more or less, as needed)
1 cup ground cashews
Preheat oven to 350° F. Mix together cabbage, celery, onion, and sea-
sonings, and place in a baking dish. Add rice milk or soy milk to cover;
don’t add too much. Bake until softened, about 50 minutes.
Top with ground cashews.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
Experiment with different seasonings. If you are able to tolerate a little
dairy (see “Healthy Tidbit”), adding organic feta or goat cheese imparts
a truly unique flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
Animal-based dairy products are very abundant in our culture and are
consumed daily by most people. Because dairy is a common allergen, it is
important to avoid or limit it in your cooking. Organic dairy products
are better than regular dairy products because they lack the hormone,
pesticide, and antibiotic residues that often are present in nonorganic
animal products. Dairy allergies can cause chronic ear infections, chronic
sinus infections, chronic
skin rashes, postnasal drip,
chronic cough or throat
clearing, and many more
minor symptoms.
60
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
21.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.2 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
91.1 mg
Niacin
0.9 mg
Iron
2.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
163.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
87.6 mg
Folate (total)
79.2 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
48.8 mg
Potassium
579.6 mg


===PAGE 75===
Delicious Green Beans with Garlic
PER SERVING: 92.5 CALORIES ~ 2.8 G PROTEIN ~ 12.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.0 G FIBER ~ 4.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 342.6 MG SODIUM
I prepare this dish quite often. It is easy, quick, and always a crowd
pleaser.
3 garlic cloves, minced or pressed
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon olive oil
1 pound green beans, washed and trimmed
¼ cup filtered water
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon tamari
2 teaspoons raw honey
In a large skillet, sauté the garlic in olive oil over medium heat for about
3 minutes.
Add the green beans, water, tamari, and honey, and cook over
medium-low heat until beans are soft but still slightly crispy. If the water
evaporates too quickly, keep adding water by the tablespoon—just
enough to keep the beans steaming.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
I use this same recipe for asparagus and many other vegetables.
Healthy Tidbit
Fiber, provided in large quantities in lightly steamed, fresh vegetables, is
essential to proper bowel function and should be increased in most peo-
ple’s diets. Adults need 25–30 grams daily (the average American’s diet
provides 10–12 grams). Low-fiber diets are associated with diverticulitis,
cancers of the colon, and other gastrointestinal problems.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
61
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
72.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
47.5 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
1.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
54.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
31.4 mg
Folate (total)
36.9 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
16.4 mg
Potassium
260.6 mg


===PAGE 76===
“French Fries”
PER SERVING: 181.4 CALORIES ~ 1.5 G PROTEIN ~ 43.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.0 G FIBER ~ 0.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 15.9 MG SODIUM
I really missed fries, so I came up with this recipe when I learned that I
could substitute a yucca root for potatoes. Now I can make them once in
a blue moon and be satisfied for a long time before I crave fries again.
1 pound yucca root
Sea salt to taste
Pepper to taste
Steam or bake yucca roots until tender, about 40 minutes. When the
yucca roots are nearly finished steaming, heat the oven to 375° F.
Allow yucca roots to cool enough so you can handle them. Cut off
the outer waxy portion, and cut them into short sticks about ½ inch
thick.
Place on a baking pan, add salt and pepper (and other seasonings, as
desired), and bake until they reach the desired crispiness.
Serves 2–3.
Substitutions
You can do the same thing with sweet potatoes, which do not need to be
steamed first. Also try taro root or Jerusalem artichokes (sunchokes).
Healthy Tidbit
A root poultice made from the yucca plant can treat skin sores and
sprains. If decocted as a tea, it may ease arthritic pains.
62
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
2.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
18.1 mg
Niacin
1.0 mg
Iron
0.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
30.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
23.8 mg
Folate (total)
30.6 µg
Zinc
0.4 mg
Vitamin C
23.4 mg
Potassium
307.3 mg


===PAGE 77===
Guacamole
PER SERVING: 145.0 CALORIES ~ 1.8 G PROTEIN ~ 8.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.8 G FIBER ~ 13.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.8 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 62.9 MG SODIUM
I have made this recipe since college, and it is always the talk of the
party. It tastes so good with pretty much any dish. My favorite accompa-
niments are rice crackers, salads, rice and beans, poached organic eggs,
or wheat-free, corn-free burrito wraps.
3 ripe avocados
2 garlic cloves, minced
2 tablespoons lemon juice
Sea salt to taste
Pepper to taste
2–3 tablespoons fresh cilantro, minced (optional)
1 teaspoon wheat-free tamari (optional; this will add salt, therefore
reduce or exclude sea salt)
½ –1 small onion, minced (optional)
Mash avocados with lemon juice. Add remaining ingredients and mix
well. If you allow it to sit for ½ hour, the tastes really come together.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
Try the optional ingredients; they really make a flavorsome guacamole.
Other vegetables to consider adding are chopped green pepper, chopped
mild or medium pepper, green onions, chopped lettuce, puréed peas, or
bean sprouts. They all add different elements. You can make your gua-
camole different every time. Adding more garlic will add more pungent
flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
Cilantro, one of my favorite herbs, is a member of the carrot family. The
seed, known as coriander, is sweet with a slight taste of orange peel.
Cilantro is cooling and sup-
ports the spleen-pancreas,
stomach, bladder, and lung
meridians. It can regulate
energy and has been used
to aid digestion, and to
relieve intestinal gas, pain,
or bloating.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
63
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
51.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
13.4 mg
Niacin
1.7 mg
Iron
0.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
48.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
25.5 mg
Folate (total)
76.3 µg
Zinc
0.6 mg
Vitamin C
10.1 mg
Potassium
442.4 mg


===PAGE 78===
Nut ’n’ Curry Hummus
PER SERVING: 356.0 CALORIES ~ 13.0 G PROTEIN ~ 31.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 8.0 G FIBER ~ 21.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 300.9 MG SODIUM
This is another fabulous dipping sauce; it is the best-tasting hummus
recipe around. A colleague of mine, J.K. Monagle, N.D., inspired this
version. Using almond butter instead of peanut butter leaves nothing to
be desired. Thank you, J.K.
3 cups cooked garbanzo beans (2 cans)
¼ cup liquid from garbanzo beans
1/3 cup tahini (a sesame seed paste that can be purchased at most
health-food stores)
3 garlic cloves, minced or pressed
¼ cup plus 1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice
3 tablespoons filtered water
½ –1 teaspoon sea salt, or to taste
½ cup almond butter
2 teaspoons curry powder
Paprika for garnish
Parsley for garnish
Blend all ingredients in blender until smooth.
Garnish with parsley and paprika, and serve with rice crackers, non-
wheat bread, or fresh dipping vegetables such as carrots and celery.
Depending on the moisture content of your almond butter and tahini,
you may need to add a little extra water or lemon juice for blending.
Serves 6–8.
Substitutions
You can omit the almond butter and curry to make a plain hummus.
From the plain base, you can add different seasonings and vegetables, for
example, black olives, artichokes, spinach, or roasted red pepper.
Healthy Tidbit
Compared to many other
beans, garbanzo beans, 
also known as chickpeas,
contain a fair amount of
vitamin C, which is an
important antioxidant.
Antioxidants function
64
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
4.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.3 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
123.5 mg
Niacin
1.8 mg
Iron
4.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
359.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
119.5 mg
Folate (total)
170.7 µg
Zinc
2.6 mg
Vitamin C
8.2 mg
Potassium
493.6 mg


===PAGE 79===
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
65
within the body as free-radical scavengers, neutralizing many reactive
oxygen species (ROS) before they can harm tissues. Free radicals occur
normally in the body as a result of everyday metabolic reactions; in
addition, certain dietary and lifestyle habits (e.g., smoking) tend to
increase them. Increasing antioxidants in our diets is one way to protect
ourselves from the free-radical damage that could eventually lead to
chronic disease. According to an article by Ayako Makino appearing in
the July 2003 issue of Hypertension Journal, oxidative stress caused by
free radicals has been linked to high blood pressure and other cardiovas-
cular diseases.


===PAGE 80===
Lemon Vegetable Rice
PER SERVING: 304.9 CALORIES ~ 6.2 G PROTEIN ~ 50.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.2 G FIBER ~ 9.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 397.2 MG SODIUM
For all those zucchinis we gardeners don’t know what to do with in the
fall, this is a terrific, light side dish that goes well with any dinner.
Juice of 2 medium lemons
2 tablespoons maple syrup
2½ cups of organic chicken broth
1½ cups of short-grain brown rice
½ teaspoon sea salt
1 cinnamon stick
5 whole cloves
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon cumin seeds
1 small onion, thinly sliced
2 small zucchinis, sliced
1/3 cup roasted cashews, whole
2 tablespoons fresh sweet basil, chopped
Lemon wedges for garnish
Pour lemon juice, maple syrup, and chicken broth into a saucepan; add
rice, sea salt, cinnamon stick, and cloves.
Cover, bring to a boil, and boil for 2 minutes. Reduce heat and sim-
mer for 25–30 minutes or until all liquid has been absorbed.
In a large skillet, sauté cumin seeds in olive oil until they begin to
pop. Add onion and cook for another 5 minutes over medium heat.
Add zucchini and cashews, and sauté until zucchini is tender.
Stir in the basil and the rice, heat for another minute or two, and
serve garnished with lemon wedges.
Serves 6–8.
Substitutions
If you prefer a different
type of nut, I would suggest
pine nuts. If you don’t have
fresh basil, you can use any
other fresh herb or leave
that ingredient out.
66
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
76.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
52.5 mg
Niacin
2.5 mg
Iron
2.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
291.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
104.6 mg
Folate (total)
36.0 µg
Zinc
1.9 mg
Vitamin C
19.5 mg
Potassium
507.6 mg


===PAGE 81===
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
67
Healthy Tidbit
Lemons, like all citrus fruits, are a great source of vitamin C. They are
also high in potassium and vitamin B-1, also known as thiamine.
Lemons have less sugar and more acid, primarily citric acid, than any
other citrus fruit. Lemon juice is antiseptic and astringent in addition to
simulating saliva production, which aids in digestion. Lemon also pro-
motes bile production, therefore supporting liver function. The essential
oil of lemon is a stimulant and can help to purify water.


===PAGE 82===
Mango Salsa
PER SERVING: 79.1 CALORIES ~ 0.9 G PROTEIN ~ 20.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.3 G FIBER ~ 0.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 3.3 MG SODIUM
Of all the tomato dishes, salsa proved the hardest one for me to give up;
therefore I had to come up with an alternative. You can use this version
to replace salsa in any dish and to add a whole new dimension of flavor.
It’s perfect over a mildly seasoned white fish such as halibut. It also can
complement guacamole or any Mexican dish.
3 ripe mangos, peeled and diced
1 red onion, minced
4 tablespoons finely chopped cilantro
Juice of ½ lemon
1–2 medium-spice peppers, such an Anaheim peppers (depending on
your tolerance for spice)
Sea salt to taste
1 medium red bell pepper, minced (optional)
Combine all ingredients in a large bowl. Serve immediately with rice
crackers, or store in the refrigerator. After it sits in the refrigerator for a
little while, it tastes even better.
Serves 6–8.
Substitutions
You can experiment with adding anything you want, e.g., black beans,
green bell peppers, avocado. You can even try adding other fruit such as
kiwis or nectarines. If you cannot tolerate spice, leave out the hot pep-
pers; it still tastes great.
Healthy Tidbit
Because mangos are cooling, they are great thirst quenchers. Mangos are
high in vitamin-A precursors and vitamin C and are also a good source
of potassium, which can
aid in cardiovascular
health. Mangos can be ton-
ing to all body types and
constitutions.
68
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
483.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
15.7 mg
Niacin
0.7 mg
Iron
0.2 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
19.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
13.1 mg
Folate (total)
20.2 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
42.4 mg
Potassium
216.7 mg


===PAGE 83===
Mashed “Potatoes” (Mashed Jerusalem
Artichokes)
PER SERVING: 80.4 CALORIES ~ 1.8 G PROTEIN ~ 13.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.3 G FIBER ~ 2.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 5.3 MG SODIUM
If you desire mashed potatoes at your Thanksgiving dinner, this is a
great alternative.
1 pound Jerusalem artichokes, scrubbed
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 tablespoon fresh tarragon, chopped
2 tablespoons soy milk
Sea salt and pepper to taste
Preheat oven to 400° F.
Cut artichokes into wedges, toss with olive oil, and place in a baking
pan. Bake for 35–40 minutes or until tender.
Remove from oven, mash well or pass through a food processor,
and add remaining ingredients. Stir once more and serve warm.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
If you have a favorite mashed potato recipe, try it with Jerusalem arti-
chokes. Just make sure to use a milk substitute, unless you can tolerate a
little dairy. You can also steam cauliflower and use it in place of the
Jerusalem artichokes. In place of tarragon, try oregano and/or thyme.
Healthy Tidbit
Jerusalem artichokes are a superior source of inulin, which is a com-
pound beneficial for diabetics. They contain pro-vitamin A, B-complex
vitamins, potassium, iron, calcium, and magnesium. They have been
known to relieve asthmatic conditions, treat constipation, and nourish
the lungs. It is best to purchase them during fall and winter, when their
flavor peaks.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
69
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
13.3 mg
Niacin
1.0 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
62.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
14.4 mg
Folate (total)
10.7 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
3.0 mg
Potassium
335.1 mg


===PAGE 84===
Milk Thistle Seasoning Salt
This blend is a tasty—and healthier—alternative to plain salt.
3 tablespoons milk thistle seeds (you can find these at a 
health-food store)
3 tablespoons sea salt
Grind the milk thistle seeds in a coffee grinder until you have a fine pow-
der. Mix with sea salt. Use as a replacement for regular salt.
Substitutions
Adding dried seaweed will afford even more nutrients. Just grind the sea-
weed in the coffee grinder and add the powder to the above mixture.
Healthy Tidbit
Milk thistle is specific in treating the liver, spleen, and kidneys. It is a
very powerful protectant of the liver and is indicated for weak veins,
blood stasis, and liver diseases. The liver is an important organ of detoxi-
fication.
70
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 85===
Olive Oil–Butter Spread
PER SERVING: 107.7 CALORIES ~ 0.1 G PROTEIN ~ 0.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.0 G FIBER ~ 12.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 5.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 20.4 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 54.6 MG SODIUM
I learned about this blend from my mentor, Dr. Dick Thom, who
inspired this cookbook. Use it as a spread instead of plain organic butter
or in cooking in place of plain organic olive oil.
1 pound organic butter, softened
1 cup extra-virgin olive oil
If necessary, heat the butter a little bit to facilitiate the blending of the
ingredients. Mix well.
Store in refrigerator, and use sparingly as a spread.
Makes 48 servings of 1 tablespoon each.
Substitutions
Instead of olive oil you can use flaxseed oil or another high-omega-3 oil,
but if you do, avoid heating it to high heat, such as for stir-frying vegeta-
bles. For stir-frying, just use olive oil or coconut oil.
Healthy Tidbit
Toxins such as heavy metals, pesticides, hormones, and antibiotics are
stored in the body’s fatty tissues. Therefore, it is important to purchase
organic sources of foods that are high in fat. This is why only organic
butter is allowed on the anti-inflammatory diet. Butter is superior to
margarine, because the production of margarine usually involves hydro-
genating plant oils to harden them for spreading. The body is physically
unable to break down or digest the end results of this process (trans fatty
acids). Hydrogenation also involves the use of heavy metals such as
nickel, presenting the risk that they’ll be present in the margarine. A few
margarine products are now on the market that contain no dairy and are
free of hydrogenated oils, such as Earth Balance margarine, which is also
free of preservatives, genetically modified products, and artificial flavors.
For more information on
hydrogenated fats, please
refer to Chapter 4.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
71
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
47.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.1 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
2.3 mg
Niacin
0.0 mg
Iron
0.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
2.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
0.2 mg
Folate (total)
0.3 µg
Zinc
0.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
2.3 mg


===PAGE 86===
Blend the nuts in a coffee grinder, in small batches, until they are the
consistency of fine meal.
In a large skillet, combine ½ of the coconut milk with the curry
paste; cook over high heat until the mixture separates.
Then reduce heat, add the remaining ingredients plus the rest of the
coconut milk, and heat over medium heat for 15–20 minutes, stirring
occasionally.
Remove from heat and allow to sit for 20 minutes before serving.
Serves 20.
Substitutions
You could try other roasted nuts instead of almonds. This recipe is eas-
ily cut in half to make a smaller amount of sauce. If this version is too
spicy, reduce the amount of red curry paste.
Healthy Tidbit
Almonds and other nuts are excellent sources of protein. Almonds are
also very high in calcium, B vitamins, iron, potassium, and phosphorus.
They are one of the richest sources of vitamin E, which is a powerful
anticancer antioxidant. Finally, substituting dietary calories with calories
from almonds has a signifi-
cant beneficial effect on
lipid profiles, according to
the results of a randomized
feeding trial published in
the June 1, 2003, issue of
the American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition.
“Peanut” Sauce
PER SERVING: 156.8 CALORIES ~ 2.7 G PROTEIN ~ 5.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.9 G FIBER ~ 15.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 10.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 88.8 MG SODIUM
Peanut sauce is a favorite accompaniment with Thai dishes such as salad
rolls and saté skewers. Using almonds instead of peanuts loses none of
the savory goodness. Red curry paste and fish sauce are available in
Asian groceries or in the Asian aisle of most supermarkets.
72
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
26.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
27.4 mg
Niacin
0.7 mg
Iron
1.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
82.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
39.8 mg
Folate (total)
10.8 µg
Zinc
0.6 mg
Vitamin C
5.4 mg
Potassium
185.1 mg
5 ounces roasted, unsalted almonds
4 cups unsweetened coconut milk
2 tablespoons red curry paste
1 tablespoon honey
3 tablespoons lemon juice
3 teaspoons fish sauce


===PAGE 87===
Poppy Seed Rice
PER SERVING: 150.6 CALORIES ~ 2.1 G PROTEIN ~ 24.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.4 G FIBER ~ 4.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 0.3 MG SODIUM
This is a fun rice to serve when entertaining. I don’t often use basmati
rice because the glycemic index is much higher than brown rice, so I save
this recipe for special occasions. You can create a very artistic meal using
simple ingredients. Avoid this dish if you are diabetic.
1 cup basmati rice
2 cups filtered water
½ teaspoon sea salt (optional)
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
6 teaspoons olive oil or olive oil/butter mixture
1½ teaspoons poppy seeds
Lemon wedges for garnish
Wash and drain rice. Combine rice, water, sea salt, and lemon juice in a
2-quart saucepan over moderate heat. Bring to a boil.
In a small skillet, heat the oil over moderate heat; add the poppy
seeds, and sauté until they become aromatic. Add seeds and oil to the
boiling lemon juice, water, and rice; allow the water to fully boil for a
few more seconds.
Reduce the heat to low, cover, and allow the rice to gently simmer
without stirring or removing the lid for 15–20 minutes or until the rice is
tender, dry, and fluffy. Turn off the heat and set aside for at least 5 min-
utes before serving.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
You can use brown rice, but it doesn’t afford as much color contrast if
you are looking for a creative, artistic presentation. It still tastes fabu-
lous, however.
Healthy Tidbit
Poppy seeds are the dried
seed of the opium poppy,
Papaver somniferum, an
herb native to Greece and
the Middle East. Contrary
to some myths, the seeds
themselves have no narcotic
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
73
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
10.3 mg
Niacin
0.0 mg
Iron
0.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
6.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
2.4 mg
Folate (total)
0.6 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
0.8 mg
Potassium
7.0 mg


===PAGE 88===
74
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
properties. Warming the seeds allows the flavors to come out. Poppy
seeds have become popular in many dishes, from rice to salad dressings
to sweet muffins. They are about half oil and thus can go rancid rapidly.
Once you’ve opened a sealed container of them, store them in the refrig-
erator, tightly covered, and use them within a couple of months. To
experiment with poppy seeds, try adding ¼ cup to a favorite muffin
recipe.


===PAGE 89===
Rosemary Squash
PER SERVING: 116.2 CALORIES ~ 1.4 G PROTEIN ~ 17.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.6 G FIBER ~ 5.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 116.6 MG SODIUM
I first had this easy-to-prepare dish at a potluck supper when some of my
colleagues and I participated in a Native American sweat lodge. We
spent the day preparing for the sweat and getting the feast ready for
afterwards. After the sweat and thanking Mother Earth, everyone
enjoyed nourishing themselves on delicious food and great friendship.
2–3 small winter squash, such as acorn or spaghetti
2 medium sweet potatoes, unpeeled
3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
2 teaspoons rosemary
½ teaspoon sea salt or to taste
¼ teaspoon pepper or to taste
Cut the squash in half; spoon out the seeds and stringy flesh from the
center. Then cut into 3/4-inch chunks, removing the shell.
Cut the sweet potatoes into 3/4-inch chunks.
Combine sweet potatoes and squash in a large baking pan, drizzle
with olive oil, and add seasonings.
Cover and bake until squash chunks are tender but do not fall apart
when you fork them, about 40 minutes. Stir occasionally during the bak-
ing process.
Serves 8.
Substitutions
Try many different squash or pumpkin varieties for this dish, and omit
the sweet potatoes if you wish.
Healthy Tidbit
In recent years, rosemary has been the subject of research in the arena of
cancer prevention,
Alzheimer’s prevention and
treatment, and heart dis-
ease treatment. Studies
have shown that rosemary
contains more than two
dozen antioxidants that
may help prevent some of
the most serious chronic
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
75
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
689.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
46.3 mg
Niacin
0.9 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
54.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
42.9 mg
Folate (total)
22.1 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
12.7 mg
Potassium
485.5 mg


===PAGE 90===
76
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
diseases. Because antioxidants are so important to cardiovascular health,
rosemary has been looked at as a potentially cardio-protective herb. And
in three separate studies on animals, rosemary has successfully inhibited
the growth of cancer cells. More research on rosemary’s anticancer
effects will surely follow. One common use of rosemary is for its anti-
inflammatory properties.


===PAGE 91===
Salad Rolls
PER SERVING: 143.8 CALORIES ~ 11.7 G PROTEIN ~ 11.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.2 G FIBER ~ 6.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 129.0 MG SODIUM
A favorite at Southeast Asian restaurants, such as those serving Thai or
Vietnamese cuisine, salad rolls are deceptively simple to make.
10 sheets of round rice paper (found in Asian section of the 
grocery store)
Small package of rice noodles, cooked and rinsed
1 bunch of cilantro, minced or whole, with stems removed
½ pound of raw firm tofu, cut into long, thin strips
2 medium carrots, cut into long, thin strips
½ cucumber (cut lengthwise), cut into long, thin strips
Small amount of green leaf lettuce, shredded
Cut cilantro, tofu, carrots, cucumber, and lettuce as directed, and make a
pile of each for assembly.
Cook rice noodles according to package; rinse well with cold water
and set aside.
Fill a large saucepan ½ inch to 1 inch deep with filtered water and
heat over medium heat. Dip one sheet of rice paper into the water until it
softens (about 15–20 seconds). Remove from water, allow excess water
to drain off, and transfer to a cutting board.
One ingredient at a time, arrange a small amount of rice noodles,
cilantro, tofu, carrots, cucumbers, and lettuce on the bottom half of the
sheet of rice paper. Fold in the sides of the rice paper, and then roll
tightly into a large roll and set aside. Repeat with all ten sheets of rice
paper. You will learn how much of each ingredient fits into each roll by
experimenting. Cut each roll in half to expose the inside.
Serve immediately with wheat-free tamari or “Peanut” Sauce (see
recipe on page 72). Serves 10.
Substitutions
You can make these as 
simple or complex as you
desire. Experiment with dif-
ferent vegetables, or even
add leftover fish. Adding
fresh mint instead of
cilantro also gives a crisp,
refreshing taste.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
77
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
363.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
473.6 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
2.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
138.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
43.2 mg
Folate (total)
24.2 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
1.8 mg
Potassium
227.8 mg


===PAGE 92===
78
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Healthy Tidbit
According to Fast Food Nation, by Eric Schlosser, in 1970 Americans
spent $6 billion on fast food; in the year 2000, they spent over $110 bil-
lion, more than was spent on higher education, computers, computer
software, or new cars. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), students can purchase name-brand fast foods, soda
pop, candy bars, potato chips, and other high-fat, sugary snacks in 98.2
percent of American high schools. The fast food industry has become a
quick fix in one sense, but a slow killer in another sense. Childhood obe-
sity is on the rise; overweight in preschoolers is increasingly common.
Long-term obesity can lead to hypertension, cardiovascular disease, dia-
betes, and other health complications.
Instead of bingeing on French fries and a shake, reeducate your
palate to crave the healthful crunch of delicious homemade snacks such
as these high-fiber salad rolls.


===PAGE 93===
Scrumptious Green Beans
PER SERVING: 68.6 CALORIES ~ 1.5 G PROTEIN ~ 6.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 4.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 393.1 MG SODIUM
Simple green beans never tasted so good. This dish offers a great way to
get some green vegetables into your family members’ diets.
2 tablespoons olive oil
½ teaspoon black or yellow mustard seeds, available in the bulk herb
section of most health-food stores
½-inch cube of peeled ginger, sliced julienne thin
¼ cup water
1 pound green beans, washed and trimmed
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon turmeric
1 teaspoon sea salt
2 tablespoons minced fresh cilantro
Juice of 1 lemon
Sauté mustard seeds and ginger in olive oil over moderate heat until
mustard seeds begin to pop.
Add the beans and stir-fry over medium heat for about 5 minutes.
Add the water, cover tightly, and simmer for 5 minutes.
Remove the lid when most of the water has evaporated. Add all
remaining ingredients except lemon juice, and continue cooking until the
beans are warm but still slightly crispy.
Add the lemon juice just before serving. Serve warm.
Serves 6.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
79
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
48.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
31.9 mg
Niacin
0.6 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
30.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
20.0 mg
Folate (total)
24.9 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
14.1 mg
Potassium
179.7 mg


===PAGE 94===
Substitutions
If you have parsley on hand but not cilantro, try that instead. Use this
recipe with many different vegetables, for example asparagus, sliced car-
rots, or root vegetables cut into long, thin strips. Remember, green beans
also taste great steamed, without any seasonings. Try them prepared that
way if you haven’t already.
Healthy Tidbit
Green beans can act as a diuretic and may be helpful in diabetes. Fresh
green beans are full of important nutrients such as pro-vitamin A, vita-
min B-complex, calcium, and potassium. B vitamins offer support to the
adrenals, which help to regulate blood sugar and blood pressure, pro-
duce some sex hormones, increase energy, and modulate the stress
response.
80
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 95===
Simple and Delectable Beets
PER SERVING: 26.8 CALORIES ~ 1.0 G PROTEIN ~ 6.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.7 G FIBER ~ 0.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 48.0 MG SODIUM
Beets are so sweet that they really need no seasonings. But if you want to
experiment with some new flavors, try this recipe.
3 beets, peeled and steamed until tender, but still slightly crunchy
1 teaspoon lemon juice
1 teaspoon honey (optional)
Sea salt and pepper to taste
Steam beets and set aside to cool slightly.
Mix lemon juice and honey together over low heat in a 2-quart
saucepan until well blended.
Turn off heat, slice beets, and add them to the pan. Mix gently.
Add sea salt and pepper to taste, and serve immediately.
If you are omitting the honey, just slice the cooked beets, sprinkle
with lemon juice, sea salt, and pepper, and serve.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Use a dash of nutmeg or a bit of ginger instead of the honey to add fla-
vor but no sugar.
Healthy Tidbit
Honey is my favorite sweetener. It is full of antioxidants and is mildly
antiseptic. The Romans used it as a digestive healer, claiming it helped
both diarrhea and constipation. Because it is easily absorbed, it satisfies
the sweet tooth much better than other processed sugars. It is sweeter
than cane sugar and it is unrefined. When replacing white sugar in a
recipe with honey, use half as much honey as you would sugar (or even
less). Because it has a higher water content than regular sugar, you can
also cut the oil in half.
There, we have already
made your recipe much
healthier with one ingre-
dient.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
81
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
2.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
9.9 mg
Niacin
0.2 mg
Iron
0.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
24.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
14.2 mg
Folate (total)
67.2 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
3.6 mg
Potassium
201.4 mg


===PAGE 96===
Steamed Vegetables
Steamed vegetables are the ideal accompaniment to many dinners. The
combination of brown rice and steamed vegetables has become a popu-
lar Japanese-style quick food, called bento. Find a favorite anti-inflam-
matory sauce and serve it with brown rice and steamed vegetables. Here
are some guidelines for steaming:
45 Minutes
Beets, carrots, turnips, winter squash, artichokes
25 Minutes
Sweet potatoes, broccoli stalks, peas, parsnips, celery
15 Minutes
Garlic, cabbage, sweet peppers, cauliflower, onions, green beans, 
asparagus
7 Minutes
Mushrooms, broccoli tips, zucchini, summer squash
Cut vegetables and place in steamer; cook for suggested length of time.
Remove from heat, season, and serve warm.
Note: Using an electric steamer with a timer is best, because you can pay
attention to your other cooking duties as your vegetables are steaming. If
you do not have an electric steamer, use a metal steamer basket that fits
into a saucepan or large pot; add an inch or so of water beneath it. This
allows the vegetables to remain out of the water while cooking. If you do
not have anything in which to steam vegetables, add a small amount of
water to a saucepan or soup pot (enough water to cover the bottom),
add the vegetables, and steam them over medium heat. You may have to
add water as it evaporates, so be sure to watch closely to keep the vege-
tables from burning.
Healthy Tidbit
Insoluble fiber, contained in the cellulose of vegetables and the outer
bran layer of whole grains, helps to increase stool bulk, stimulate normal
gastrointestinal activity, and dilute colonic toxins. Insoluble fiber also
helps to prevent the formation of diverticulosis. Soluble fibers are pec-
tins, gums, mucilages, and some hemicelluloses. Sources include many
fruits and vegetables, as well as oat bran, barley, and legumes. Soluble
fibers aid in bacterial fermentation and act to bind bile salts, neutralizing
them for excretion.
82
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 97===
Stuffed Grape Leaves (Dolmades)
PER SERVING: 131.8 CALORIES ~ 2.5 G PROTEIN ~ 14.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.6 G FIBER ~ 8.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.9 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 157.5 MG SODIUM
If you like lemony, tangy, and creative, this is your appetizer.
¾ cup cooked brown rice
4 ounces vine leaves such as grape leaves (these can be purchased in a
jar at an ethnic-food store)
1 tablespoon olive oil plus 1 tablespoon olive oil for sautéing
¼ cup minced onion
4 cloves garlic
2 tablespoons chopped mint leaves
¼ cup chopped fresh dill
1/3 cup raisins, chopped
1/3 cup pine nuts, chopped
1½ tablespoons chopped kalamata olives
¼ teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper
¾ cup organic chicken broth
2 tablespoons lemon juice
Arrange grape leaves flat in bowl, cover with boiling water, and let sit
for 2 minutes. Drain, cover with cold water, let sit for 5 minutes, and
drain again.
Meanwhile, sauté onion and 1 minced garlic clove in 1 tablespoon
olive oil, stirring frequently, until soft, about 5 minutes.
Combine cooked rice, onion mixture, mint, dill, raisins, pine nuts,
olives, salt, and pepper in large bowl.
Preheat oven to 350° F. Place one leaf on cutting board, vein side
up, and cut off stem. Add a heaping spoonful of filling in the center.
Fold the sides of leaf over filling, then roll tightly from stem end to tip to
make a neat roll. If necessary, use a toothpick to keep each leaf neatly
rolled.
Set seam side down in a
wax paper–lined 9 x 13-inch
baking dish. Repeat with
remaining leaves and filling,
placing grape leaves cozily
together; make two layers if
necessary.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
83
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
396.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
65.9 mg
Niacin
0.9 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
95.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
39.5 mg
Folate (total)
16.7 µg
Zinc
0.6 mg
Vitamin C
4.5 mg
Potassium
177.1 mg


===PAGE 98===
84
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Cut 3 garlic cloves into large pieces and poke them here and there
between the grape leaves. Pour chicken broth over grape leaves, then
remaining olive oil and 1 teaspoon lemon juice. Bake 20–25 minutes, or
until liquid is absorbed. Drizzle with remaining lemon juice and serve.
Serves 8.
Substitutions
I once met a woman who made the most wonderful stuffed grape leaves.
When I asked her how she made them, she couldn’t tell me the recipe
because she said she makes them differently every time based on what she
has in her kitchen. So be creative! You can add ½ pound of uncooked
lamb to this recipe and increase the baking time to 35 minutes for a
richer flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
Grape leaves are from a most versatile fruit. We eat grapes and we make
wines and jams from them; we can even eat the leaves as a wrap for
savory food ingredients. Grapes and grape leaves are a great source of
vitamins A, B, and C.


===PAGE 99===
Stuffed Mushrooms
PER SERVING: 317.7 CALORIES ~ 3.2 G PROTEIN ~ 5.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.0 G FIBER ~ 32.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 7.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 5.9 MG SODIUM
Baked mushrooms, which can go with many meals, are a fun dish
to make during the holidays. They are also good on the snack table at
a party. You can experiment and serve three or four different kinds of
stuffed mushrooms.
1 cup shredded, unsweetened coconut
25–30 small open-capped mushrooms, trimmed, with stems removed
(simply pull them off)
1 cup olive oil
4 garlic cloves, minced
Juice of 2 lemons
Small amount of grated lemon zest (avoid the bitter white pith)
2 teaspoons grated gingerroot
¼ cup sunflower seeds, ground
Sea salt and pepper to taste
2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro leaves for garnish
Lemon wedges for garnish
Preheat oven to 400° F. Spread coconut on a baking sheet and bake until
slightly browned.
Place mushrooms trimmed side up in a large roasting pan (use one
that can go under the broiler).
Combine coconut with remaining ingredients in a large bowl and
mix well. Spoon the mixture into the mushrooms evenly, cover loosely
with foil, and bake 15–20 minutes or until mushrooms are tender. Broil
at the last minute to brown the top. Serve garnished with lemon slices
and cilantro leaves. 
Serves 8.
Substitutions
You can use large mush-
rooms, such as portobellos,
and make only 6–8 of them.
For a variation on the stuff-
ing, experiment with a com-
bination of ground nuts,
chopped spinach, olive oil,
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
85
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.5 RE
Vitamin D
1.1 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
12.3 mg
Niacin
2.3 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
94.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
25.5 mg
Folate (total)
23.4 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
7.4 mg
Potassium
268.1 mg


===PAGE 100===
86
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
and garlic. You may be surprised at how good vegetables and herbs can
taste inside a mushroom.
Healthy Tidbit
Mushrooms are a powerful immune stimulant and immune modulator.
They are great detoxifiers because they thrive upon what is decaying
around them. They are said to absorb and safely eliminate toxins such
as undesirable blood lipids, pathogens, and excess mucous in the respi-
ratory system. The reishi and shiitake varieties have been studied for
their anticancer effects. The reishi mushroom has been shown to reduce
cancer-causing free radicals by 50 percent.


===PAGE 101===
Sweet Potato “Fries”
PER SERVING: 93.8 CALORIES ~ 1.5 G PROTEIN ~ 19.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.9 G FIBER ~ 1.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 51.0 MG SODIUM
This very simple recipe was given to me by Dawn Berry, L.Ac., an
acupuncturist practicing in McMinnville, Oregon.
3 unpeeled sweet potatoes or yams, sliced into strips
1 teaspoon olive oil
Sea salt and pepper to taste
Dash of thyme
Dash of nutmeg
Preheat oven to 400° F. Toss olive oil, sweet potatoes, sea salt, and pep-
per in a large bowl.
Transfer to a baking pan, sprinkle with nutmeg and thyme, and
bake for 30–35 minutes or until tender.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Many different seasonings will work with sweet potatoes. Experiment
with allspice, rosemary, or grated orange zest.
Healthy Tidbit
Fries from fast-food restaurants are cooked in oils at high temperatures,
which means the oils have been converted to trans fatty acids and thus
should be avoided. Furthermore, the familiar taste of fast-food fries is
usually created by the addition of sugar, salt, and chemical flavorings.
Sweet potato “fries” offer a much healthier alternative.
Appetizers, Side Dishes, Seasonings, and Spreads
87
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,662.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
27.8 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
0.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
43.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
23.2 mg
Folate (total)
9.7 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
1.8 mg
Potassium
295.7 mg


===PAGE 102===
Vegetable Marinade for Grilling
PER SERVING: 323.9 CALORIES ~ 0.2 G PROTEIN ~ 1.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.2 G FIBER ~ 36.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 5.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 389.0 MG SODIUM
Using this marinade causes the flavor of grilled vegetables to explode in
your mouth. Serve them with a large salad and seasoned grilled fish.
1 cup olive oil
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
5–7 cloves of garlic, finely chopped
½ teaspoon ground cayenne
½ teaspoon onion powder
½ teaspoon oregano
½ teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon sea salt
Whisk ingredients together with a fork until well blended. Paint vegeta-
bles with the marinade before and during the grilling process.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
For a lower-fat version, reduce the oil to ¼–½ cup and add ¼ cup of
water. You can also use this recipe to marinate vegetables for a day
before baking or steaming them. Chop the vegetables of your choice,
place in a large Tupperware container, and pour marinade over the top.
Periodically invert the container to consistently coat all the vegetables.
Bake or broil the vegetables on a grate, which allows the oil to drain.
Healthy Tidbit
It is very important to meet our daily vitamin requirements through diet.
In the U.S., vegetable intake has reduced significantly as incidence of
noncommunicable disease has risen dramatically. Food is our source of
fuel and energy, and vegetables hold the pure, vital, and essential nutri-
ents we need to survive and
thrive. Work on increasing
your vegetable intake this
week.
88
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
7.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
8.7 mg
Niacin
0.0 mg
Iron
0.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
5.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
1.8 mg
Folate (total)
0.8 µg
Zinc
0.0 mg
Vitamin C
1.0 mg
Potassium
19.4 mg


===PAGE 103===
Breads, Muffins, and
Tortillas
Hannah’s Rice-Flour Bread  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Honey Millet Muffins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Spelt Bread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Spelt Tortillas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
The All-Forgiving Banana Bread  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Zucchini Bread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98


===PAGE 104===
Hannah’s Rice-Flour Bread
PER SERVING: 533.9 CALORIES ~ 10.2 G PROTEIN ~ 96.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.5 G FIBER ~ 12.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 6.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 126.1 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 740.1 MG SODIUM
Gluten-free bread has never tasted so good. Try this one; you won’t be
disappointed. This recipe is from Hannah Ashley, a massage therapist
practicing in McMinnville, Oregon.
½ cup warm water
2 teaspoons plus ¼ cup honey
4 teaspoons dry yeast granules
2 cups rice flour
2 cups tapioca flour
4 teaspoons xanthan gum, available in health-food stores
1½ teaspoons sea salt
1¼ cups soy milk
4 tablespoons melted organic butter
1 teaspoon vinegar
3 organic eggs, gently beaten
In a small bowl, mix together water, 2 teaspoons honey, and yeast; set
aside for 15 minutes.
In a large mixing bowl, combine dry ingredients.
Add wet ingredients to dry ingredients, and stir 20 times.
Add yeast mixture, and mix all with a mixer/beater. Note: Finished
batter looks more like a thick cake batter than bread dough.
Divide batter into 2 equal amounts. Place in two 8 x 4 x 2½-inch,
parchment paper–lined loaf pans. Smooth tops with a wet rubber spat-
ula, and let rise in a warm place for approximately 1 hour.
Once dough has risen, preheat oven to 350° F. Bake loaves for
20–25 minutes. Serves 6.
Substitutions
You can experiment with
different flours for this
bread. You can also use any
alternative milk in place of
the soy milk. Coconut oil
will easily replace the butter
for those who can’t tolerate
any dairy.
90
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
95.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.5 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
56.1 mg
Niacin
2.9 mg
Iron
2.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
180.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.3 µg
Magnesium
37.9 mg
Folate (total)
84.3 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
56.1 mg
Potassium
236.7 mg


===PAGE 105===
Breads, Muffins, and Tortillas
91
Healthy Tidbit
An article published in 2005 in the journal Bioscience, Biotechnology,
and Biochemistry indicates that bread containing resistant starch (6
grams or more of tapioca per 2 slices) is useful for prevention of
lifestyle-related diseases such as type-II diabetes, and as a supplementary
means of dietetic therapy. The resistant starch had an inhibitory effect
on the postprandial (after eating) increase in blood glucose in male and
female adults who had a fasting blood glucose level between 100 and
140 mg/dl.


===PAGE 106===
Honey Millet Muffins
PER SERVING: 210.1 CALORIES ~ 5.3 G PROTEIN ~ 35.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 5.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 26.5 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 233.2 MG SODIUM
My daughter loves these little muffins, which can be served as a dessert
because they taste so sweet.
1 organic egg
3 tablespoons organic butter, melted
½ cup milk substitute (e.g., soy milk) or water
½ cup honey
2 cups oat flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon soda
½ teaspoon sea salt
1 cup millet, uncooked
½ teaspoon guar gum
Preheat oven to 375° F. Mix all wet ingredients together in a large bowl.
Still mixing, add the dry ingredients slowly. Add millet last, and stir
through the mixture.
Spoon mixture into muffin tin (greased if you are not using paper
liners), and bake for 17–20 minutes.
Makes 12 regular muffins.
Substitutions
This recipe contains enough guar gum to substitute for the gluten in
wheat flour, so experiment with substituting different gluten-free flours.
Oat happens to be my favorite because it tastes similar to whole wheat.
Healthy Tidbit
In the United States, millet is mostly used for bird feed, yet it would
benefit us to include more of it in our diets. Millet is the preferred grain
for treatment of blood
sugar imbalances. Of all the
cereal grains, it has the
highest amount of protein
and the highest iron con-
tent. It is also rich in phos-
phorus and the B vitamins.
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
34.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.1 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
41.1 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
1.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
146.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
46.6 mg
Folate (total)
23.5 µg
Zinc
1.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
126.5 mg
92
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 107===
Spelt Bread
PER SERVING: 184.0 CALORIES ~ 4.7 G PROTEIN ~ 32.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.5 G FIBER ~ 3.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 349.7 MG SODIUM
Because spelt has gluten in it, this bread has no problem binding
together without an additional binder. Use this as a substitute for wheat
bread, but avoid eating it every day because of its gluten content and its
allergic potential.
1 tablespoon active dry yeast
1¼ cups warm filtered water
2 tablespoons organic coconut oil, warmed to a liquid consistency
3 tablespoons raw honey or brown rice syrup
1½ teaspoon sea salt
3½–4½ cups spelt flour (final amount used will depend on humidity)
Mix ¼ cup warm water with yeast and let sit while preparing other
ingredients.
In a large mixing bowl, mix 1 cup warm water, liquified coconut
oil, honey, salt, and 1½ cups of flour. When the yeast is bubbly, add it
to the mixing bowl. Beat generously for at least 60 seconds to develop
the gluten. Add another cup of flour gradually while stirring the mixture
to make a soft dough.
On a floured cutting board, knead the dough for 10 minutes while
gradually adding more flour to form the dough into a round loaf. Add
enough flour to keep the dough from sticking to the board but not so
much that it falls apart. Avoid overworking the dough, which can lead
to toughness.
When the loaf is finished, form it into a rectangle, place it in a
greased bread pan, and set it in a warm place (85° F) to rise for 1 hour.
When the dough has risen slightly, bake at 350° F for 30 minutes.
Remember, the spelt flour will cause the bread to rise less than it would
with wheat flour; thus the loaf will be more dense than you are used to.
Makes one small loaf
(approximately 10 serv-
ings).
Substitutions
You can add some baking
powder to this recipe to
help the bread rise a little
more, but don’t overdo it:
Breads, Muffins, and Tortillas
93
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
1.4 mg
Niacin
1.8 mg
Iron
1.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
15.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
1.3 mg
Folate (total)
27.8 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
186.1 mg


===PAGE 108===
94
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
¼ to ½ teaspoon is plenty. If you want to shape the dough into buns,
divide the loaf into 10 parts and shape them any way you desire before
allowing them to rise.
You can try different combinations of flours, but remember, if the
flour does not contain gluten, you also need to add a binder (see Substi-
tutions Chart on page 226).
Healthy Tidbit
Although spelt is a relative of wheat and contains gluten, many wheat-
intolerant people can tolerate it. As mentioned, because it contains a
high amount of gluten, it should be rotated in the diet. Spelt’s water
solubility is different from wheat’s and therefore it may be more readily
assimilated into the body.


===PAGE 109===
Spelt Tortillas
PER SERVING: 140.6 CALORIES ~ 3.4 G PROTEIN ~ 21.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.4 G FIBER ~ 4.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 0.1 MG SODIUM
Tortillas can be served with many meals in place of bread or crackers.
This wheat-free, corn-free version is fun to make and tastes great.
2 cups spelt flour (option: 1 cup white spelt flour, 1 cup whole-grain spelt flour)
1 cup warm filtered water (slightly more or less depending on humidity level)
2 tablespoons olive oil
¼ cup spelt flour (for rolling out the dough)
Add water to spelt flour; knead the dough into a uniform mixture with
your hands. Form the mixture into 8 egg-sized balls; set aside for about
20 minutes.
On a generously floured surface, use a rolling pin to roll out 1 ball
into a circle. If the dough sticks to the rolling pin or the surface, add a
little more flour. If it falls apart, add a few drops of water.
Keep rolling the dough until you make a round, very thin tortilla.
(As you become more practiced, you will find it easier to make a round
shape; it is okay if your tortillas are not perfect the first time around.)
Heat a skillet over medium-high heat, and add ½ teaspoon olive oil.
Place the tortilla in the skillet, and heat it just enough to lightly brown
the bottom (about 60 seconds). When the tortilla is done on one side, it
will begin to puff up. Flip the tortilla and heat briefly on the other side
until lightly browned (about 60 more seconds).
Place directly into a napkin and fold the napkin over it to keep it
warm. Repeat with each dough ball. Serve immediately.
Makes 8 tortillas.
Healthy Tidbit
Making foods from scratch can prove beneficial to your health. When
you make tortillas at home, you are using only a few ingredients, all of
which you know are safe.
Next time you are in the
grocery store, pick up an
average package of tortil-
las and read the list of
ingredients. Tortillas are
simple and should remain
that way.
Breads, Muffins, and Tortillas
95
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
0.0 mg
Niacin
1.0 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
0.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
0.0 mg
Folate (total)
0.0 µg
Zinc
0.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
127.9 mg


===PAGE 110===
The All-Forgiving Banana Bread
PER SERVING: 368.5 CALORIES ~ 7.0 G PROTEIN ~ 42.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.9 G FIBER ~ 20.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 6.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 54.5 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 232.2 MG SODIUM
I mean it when I say all-forgiving. You could do a lot to this recipe and
still have it turn out great. Check out all the options in “Substitutions.”
Kids love this bread. Most people have no idea that it doesn’t contain
wheat. Compared to a regular banana bread recipe, it calls for only half
the amount of butter/oil because it uses honey instead of sugar. It also
contains half the amount of “sugar” of a regular banana bread.
¼ cup organic butter or vegan margarine (without hydrogenated oils),
softened
1/8 cup organic coconut oil, warmed to a liquid consistency
½ cup honey
4 medium ripe bananas, puréed or thoroughly mashed with a fork
2 organic eggs
1 teaspoon baking soda
¼ teaspoon sea salt
1½ cup chopped walnuts
2 cups spelt flour
Preheat oven to 375° F.
Mix all wet ingredients together. You can use a blender to purée the
bananas with the other wet ingredients. Gradually add the dry ingredi-
ents to the blender, and mix until smooth.
Pour into a 9 x 4 x 3-inch greased loaf pan or two small loaf pans.
Bake for 15 minutes; reduce oven to 350° F and bake for another 40–45
minutes.
Makes one 9 x 4-inch loaf (approximately 10 slices).
Substitutions
As always, brown rice syrup is an acceptable substitute for honey. Plus,
you can use pretty much
any flour, or a combination
of flours, and this recipe
will turn out. Bananas add
so much binder that they
eliminate the need for the
extra binder often called
for when using a nonwheat
96
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
52.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
27.7 mg
Niacin
1.3 mg
Iron
1.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
93.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
42.8 mg
Folate (total)
32.3 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
4.4 mg
Potassium
362.8 mg


===PAGE 111===
Breads, Muffins, and Tortillas
97
flour. My favorite is to use a combination of rice flour, garbanzo flour,
and oat flour. Other options include rye flour and tapioca flour. As for
the nuts, you can also experiment with pecans, cashews, pumpkin seeds,
sunflower seeds, flaxseeds, coconut, or just about anything else you have
in the cupboard. A small amount of raisins will add extra sweetness.
My favorite variation—always a crowd pleaser—is to use 1 cup
coconut and 1 cup millet in place of the nuts; then pour the batter into
muffin pans. Follow the baking directions in the recipe for honey millet
muffins.
Healthy Tidbit
Ever since traveling to Africa, I have been curious about bananas. The
bananas I ate there were unlike any I have eaten elsewhere, full of sweet-
ness and moisture. I have been searching ever since for a banana that
tastes that good. I was told there are 52 different species of bananas that
grow on the African continent. Bananas are very high in potassium and
therefore can help modulate blood pressure. They have a high sugar
content, but are higher in minerals than any other soft fruit except
strawberries (sadly, though, strawberries are often very heavily sprayed
with chemicals).


===PAGE 112===
Zucchini Bread
PER SERVING: 390.9 CALORIES ~ 6.7 G PROTEIN ~ 48.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.3 G FIBER ~ 20.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 15.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 63.5 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 272.5 MG SODIUM
My mom made zucchini bread when I was little, and I love to eat it now
as much as I did then. You really can’t taste the difference between the
old version and the healthy version.
¾ cup organic coconut oil, warmed to liquid consistency
3 organic eggs, beaten
2 cups grated zucchini
1 cup raw honey
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
3 cups oat flour
1 teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon sea salt
Preheat oven to 350° F.
Mix together all wet ingredients, including zucchini. Gradually add
dry ingredients, mixing thoroughly. Pour batter into a greased 9 x 4 x 3-
inch loaf pan.
Bake for 1 hour or until a knife inserted in the center comes out
clean. Makes one 9 x 4-inch loaf (approximately 10 slices).
Substitutions
You can try different combinations of flours with this recipe, but remem-
ber, if the flour does not contain gluten, you also need to add a binder.
Also experiment with adding seeds, chopped nuts, raisins, etc., for more
texture and varied flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
Zucchini are best if you eat them fresh and in season. They are great
from mid-summer through late fall. Look for locally grown varieties that
are small in size. They can
grow quite large, but the
larger they get the more
their flavor disappears.
When baked into cookies
and muffins, zucchini adds
moisture and important
nutrients.
98
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
36.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
30.0 mg
Niacin
0.6 mg
Iron
1.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
174.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.2 µg
Magnesium
49.6 mg
Folate (total)
23.9 µg
Zinc
1.3 mg
Vitamin C
4.0 mg
Potassium
208.7 mg


===PAGE 113===
Breakfasts
Five-Minute Breakfast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .100
Broccoli and Olive Frittata  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .101
Granola  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .103
Mexican Morning Eggs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104
Protein Power Breakfast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .105
Quickest Oatmeal You’ll Ever Eat . . . . . . . . . . . . . .106
Tofu Scramble  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .107
Dr. Fisel’s Tofu Scramble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .109
Wheat-Free Pancakes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .110
Easy Pancakes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .112
Breakfast Eggnog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .114
Breakfast Smoothie  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .115


===PAGE 114===
Combine all ingredients in a saucepan on the stove. Add milk to cover
the rice for a cereal consistency. Warm over moderate heat to desired
temperature and serve.
Serves 2.
Substitutions
Any seeds and nuts will do. Experiment with whatever is in your cabi-
net. Pumpkin spice or nutmeg would also be tasty. Or add fresh, cut
fruit. You can always cook your rice fresh instead of using leftover rice,
but the preparation time becomes longer than 5 minutes. Adding
coconut milk instead of rice milk is a good way to add more fat to the
diet and adds richer flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
Cinnamon-leaf oil can be used for its antiseptic, tonic, and warming
properties. It is used to treat nausea and colds, and can be a powerful
styptic, which means it can help halt bleeding. Research by Alam Khan
and colleagues published in 2003 in the journal Diabetes Care suggests
that cinnamon is helpful in
regulating and stabilizing
blood sugar.
Five-Minute Breakfast
PER SERVING: 370.5 CALORIES ~ 11.0 G PROTEIN ~ 40.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.2 G FIBER ~ 20.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 28.2 MG SODIUM
If you have leftover, cooked brown rice in your refrigerator, this is an
easy meal, especially on those mornings when you think there’s nothing
in your kitchen for breakfast. I always make sure to have nuts, seeds,
and raisins on hand for baked goods; therefore I always have the ingredi-
ents to make this simple breakfast.
100
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.6 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
64.0 mg
Niacin
2.7 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
295.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
142.8 mg
Folate (total)
66.6 µg
Zinc
2.2 mg
Vitamin C
0.8 mg
Potassium
378.3 mg
1 cup leftover cooked brown rice
¼ teaspoon cinnamon powder
1/8 cup raisins
¼ cup chopped walnuts
¼ cup sunflower seeds
½ cup rice milk or other alternative milk
¼ teaspoon carob powder (optional)
½ teaspoon maple syrup (optional)


===PAGE 115===
Broccoli and Olive Frittata
PER SERVING: 237.9 CALORIES ~ 15.2 G PROTEIN ~ 14.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.3 G FIBER ~ 14.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 317.3 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 286.8 MG SODIUM
This is a great-tasting, crustless alternative to quiche.
1 medium yellow bell pepper
1 medium red bell pepper
2 broccoli crowns, cut into bite-size pieces
½ cup pitted ripe olives, halved
6 organic eggs, softly beaten
½ cup soy milk
2 tablespoons chopped fresh sweet basil or 1 teaspoon dried basil
1 teaspoon dried oregano
Sea salt and pepper to taste
¼ cup cashews, ground fine for garnish
Quarter and seed peppers, then broil them for 5–10 minutes or until
lightly charred. Place in a closed brown paper bag, and let cool for 5
minutes. Peel and thinly slice. (If you don’t mind the peel, leave it on and
just slice the roasted peppers into thin slices.)
Reduce oven heat to 400° F.
Grease a 9-inch round pan. Place broccoli, peppers, and olives in the
pan, making sure to arrange them evenly. Beat remaining ingredients
together in a small bowl and pour over vegetables.
Bake for 35–40 minutes or until the center has set. Broil for the last
two minutes to brown the top. Cool, slice into wedges, and serve warm
or cold garnished with ground cashews (in place of Parmesan cheese).
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You can use this basic recipe for any type of frittata that you desire.
Other ingredient ideas
include basil, pine nuts, and
pesto. You can add spinach
to almost any frittata. Be
creative.
Healthy Tidbit
Broccoli, as a member of
the brassica family, sup-
ports liver function. It is 
Breakfasts
101
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
551.4 RE
Vitamin D
1.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.5 mg
Calcium
120.1 mg
Niacin
1.5 mg
Iron
3.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
270.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
1.0 µg
Magnesium
68.9 mg
Folate (total)
115.9 µg
Zinc
1.9 mg
Vitamin C
208.6 mg
Potassium
609.7 mg


===PAGE 116===
102
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
an important stimulator of the second phase of detoxification that
occurs in the liver; therefore, try to include it in your diet often. It is 
also useful for eye complaints. A serving contains twice as much vitamin
C as an orange and almost as much calcium as whole milk (and the cal-
cium is better absorbed). It also contains selenium and vitamins pro-A
and E. If you have a thyroid problem, consult a physician before eating
broccoli raw.


===PAGE 117===
Preheat oven to 325° F.
Mix dry ingredients together in a large bowl.
Combine honey and oil in a saucepan and heat to a liquid consis-
tency. Pour over dry ingredients. Mix well. Flatten into a baking pan.
Bake for 15–20 minutes. Cool and store in an airtight container.
Serve with milk substitute and/or fresh fruit.
Serves 14.
Substitutions
You can prepare this recipe with many different nuts and seeds and
even dried fruit if you are not diabetic. For a change I sometimes add ½
cup of almond butter or tahini. You can also try brown rice syrup
instead of honey.
Healthy Tidbit
The botanical name for oats is Avena sativa. One of my favorite
medicinal uses for Avena is as an adrenal-supportive herb. It can help
increase energy and tonify the adrenals while aiding anxiety or irritabil-
ity. Because this herb supports the adrenals and energy production, it is
an aid in balancing the endocrine system. I also use it for people who
have difficulty sleeping related to overactive mind or anxiety. Eating
oats has also been known
to help decrease choles-
terol.
Granola
PER SERVING: 317.9 CALORIES ~ 7.2 G PROTEIN ~ 24.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.7 G FIBER ~ 23.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 10.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 3.3 MG SODIUM
This simple-to-make version of an old favorite allows you to avoid the
additives and hydrogenated oils that are found in most commercially
processed granola.
Breakfasts
103
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.4 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
93.2 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
0.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
210.8 mg
Folate (total)
36.8 µg
Zinc
102.5 mg
Vitamin C
0.4 mg
Potassium
241.3 mg
6 cups rolled oats
1¼ cups unsweetened coconut
1 cup chopped almonds
1 cup raw, shelled sunflower seeds
½ cup sesame seeds
½ cup honey
½ cup organic coconut oil


===PAGE 118===
Combine rice, beans, and seasonings in a skillet; cook over medium-low
heat.
In a separate skillet, prepare eggs however you desire.
When eggs are finished and rice and beans are warm, serve them
together on a plate. Add diced avocado on top.
Serves 3.
Substitutions
Experiment with other leftover grains, such as quinoa or amaranth. You
can easily cut this recipe in half to accommodate fewer diners.
Healthy Tidbit
Many people are concerned about the cholesterol content of eggs. In
fact, however, eggs have in them an anticholesterol agent that protects
our bodies from their cholesterol content. I believe that eggs can be good
dietary cholesterol regulators. Organic eggs especially are good choles-
terol regulators, because the chickens’ diet contains fewer toxins. If the
chickens were fed flaxseeds, eggs would be an even better regulator.
Remember from earlier in
the book that eggs need to
be cooked slowly. Other-
wise, enjoy!
Mexican Morning Eggs
PER SERVING: 303.7 CALORIES ~ 13.8 G PROTEIN ~ 29.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 8.4 G FIBER ~ 16.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 282.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 734.0 MG SODIUM
I save this breakfast for when I have some leftover brown rice (and
maybe some black beans) from the night before. It is simple and tastes
delicious, and is filled with everything you need to begin your day.
Adjust the amount of seasonings as necessary to satisfy your tastebuds.
104
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
198.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.9 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.4 mg
Calcium
84.6 mg
Niacin
2.2 mg
Iron
2.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
214.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.9 µg
Magnesium
53.7 mg
Folate (total)
85.1 µg
Zinc
1.6 mg
Vitamin C
6.7 mg
Potassium
607.8 mg
4 organic eggs, cooked any way you like
1 cup leftover cooked brown rice
¾ cup black beans, home-cooked or from
a can (rinse first to remove excess salt)
½ teaspoon cumin
½ teaspoon paprika
½ teaspoon chili powder
½ teaspoon sea salt
1 medium avocado, diced


===PAGE 119===
Grind all seeds together in your coffee grinder (which by now must be
going through an identity crisis).
Place seeds in a cereal bowl. Add honey and a small amount of hot
water or hot milk substitute. Mix together and top with sliced bananas.
Sprinkle a little more honey or maple syrup on top and enjoy.
Serves 1.
Substitutions
According to taste, you can use different combinations of seeds. I also
like to add ground coconut. For a cold version of the breakfast, substi-
tute cold milk in place of the hot water.
Healthy Tidbit
Flaxseeds are an excellent source of omega-3 fatty acids because of their
alpha-linolenic acid component. Essential fatty acids are called “essen-
tial” because our body cannot make them; therefore we must obtain
them through diet. Our body is quite dependent upon the balance of
important fats in the diet. Omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids must be in
balance to promote eicosanoid formation. Eicosanoids are precursors to
important hormone-like compounds that help to regulate the body’s
endocrine system, inflammatory processes, and overall metabolism. The
typical American diet currently provides up to thirty times more omega-
6 fatty acids than omega-3 fatty acids, which can promote an imbalance
in the inflammatory
processes and increase sus-
ceptibility to disease. This
is why it is vitally impor-
tant to consume a variety
of foods and to make sure
you get plenty of omega-3
fatty acids. See Chapter 4
for more on this topic.
Protein Power Breakfast
PER SERVING: 343.6 CALORIES ~ 10.1 G PROTEIN ~ 30.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 8.8 G FIBER ~ 23.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 7.0 MG SODIUM
This quick and easy breakfast is filled with many nutrients, including
essential fatty acids and protein.
Breakfasts
105
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
5.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.8 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
230.4 mg
Niacin
2.4 mg
Iron
4.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.6 mg
Phosphorus
330.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
190.0 mg
Folate (total)
80.7 µg
Zinc
2.9 mg
Vitamin C
5.5 mg
Potassium
520.7 mg
1 tablespoon flaxseeds
2 tablespoons sesame seeds
2 tablespoons sunflower seeds
1 teaspoon honey
½ medium banana, sliced


===PAGE 120===
Quickest Oatmeal You’ll Ever Eat
PER SERVING: 297.7 CALORIES ~ 8.2 G PROTEIN ~ 68.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 6.2 G FIBER ~ 4.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 196.7 MG SODIUM
This breakfast takes fewer than three minutes to prepare. For an on-the-
go version, use a glass bowl with a tightly sealed lid, place all the ingredi-
ents in it, and add it to the contents of your briefcase or backpack. If
you’ve used boiling water, when you get to work or school, your cereal
will be cool enough to eat.
1 cup nut-and-fruit muesli (natural with no additives)
½–1 cup hot or boiling water
½ teaspoon maple syrup (optional; the fruit in the cereal adds
sweetness)
Stir all ingredients together in a cereal bowl. Let sit for at least 1 minute
before eating.
Serves 1.
Substitutions
Another quick idea for hot cereal is to begin with 1 cup plain oatmeal,
add a few frozen berries and a little honey, and pour boiling water over
the mix. The water will melt the berries, making the oatmeal ready to eat
in about 60 seconds. Adding ground flaxseeds to your oatmeal increases
the fiber, protein, and essential fatty acids.
Healthy Tidbit
When Mom said to eat breakfast every morning, she was right. Research
presented at the American Heart Association’s 43rd annual conference, in
March 2003, showed that breakfast-eaters are far less likely to be obese
or have diabetes or heart disease. Eating a whole-grain cereal each day
was associated with a 15 percent reduction in risk for insulin resistance
syndrome, a precursor to diabetes and weight gain.
106
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.8 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.9 mg
Calcium
2.2 mg
Niacin
10.3 mg
Iron
7.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
1.0 mg
Phosphorus
206.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
3.1 µg
Magnesium
66.8 mg
Folate (total)
206.6 µg
Zinc
3.2 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
419.9 mg


===PAGE 121===
Drain tofu of extra moisture and cut into slabs.
Mix spices and flour together in a small bowl.
If using garlic and onions, sauté them together in a large skillet over
medium heat until they are soft. Add other vegetables, and continue
sautéing until they are partially cooked.
Add tofu by crumbling it into pieces to resemble scrambled eggs.
Add spice/flour mixture and water.
Sauté a little longer until vegetables are cooked to your liking.
(Make sure to cook flour long enough to eliminate the taste of raw
starch—about 2 minutes). Serve immediately.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
Use any vegetables you want; this is a good way to clean out your
crisper drawer of small
amounts of leftover raw
veggies. For a time-saving
measure, quadruple the
seasoning and flour mix-
ture, and store the extra in
a small jar for the next few
times you make the recipe.
Tofu Scramble
PER SERVING: 114.4 CALORIES ~ 7.5 G PROTEIN ~ 10.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.6 G FIBER ~ 5.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 224.1 MG SODIUM
Tofu is a good alternative to eggs for breakfast. This recipe has been
adapted from The Complete Food Allergy Cookbook, by Marilyn
Gioannini, M.D.
Breakfasts
107
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
597.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
172.0 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
1.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
120.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
39.1 mg
Folate (total)
30.3 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
6.8 mg
Potassium
305.5 mg
1 pound firm tofu
2 tablespoons spelt flour (or
any type of nonwheat flour)
1 tablespoon olive oil, for
sautéing
4–5 cups chopped mixed
vegetables (for example,
zucchini, yellow squash,
carrots, onions, and garlic)
1 teaspoon onion powder
1 teaspoon paprika
2 teaspoons garlic powder
½ teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon turmeric
1 teaspoon curry powder
Black pepper to taste
Dash cayenne if tolerated
½ cup filtered water


===PAGE 122===
108
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Healthy Tidbit
The soybean is a magical bean. Even five thousand years ago, Chinese
texts referred to the soybean as one of the most important crops. Soy is
an inexpensive source of vegetarian protein. It is rich in isoflavones (a
plant estrogen) and therefore is often suggested to menopausal women
for prevention of osteoporosis and alleviation of some menopausal com-
plaints.
I need to caution against soy and its possible allergenicity. Some
people can react to soy, so it should be experimented with. To determine
whether you react to soy, leave it out of your diet for four weeks, and
then reintroduce it (see the section in Chapter 3 on food allergies and
intolerances for a discussion of how to test yourself for food sensitivi-
ties). Because of its many uses, the soybean is often genetically modified
or heavily processed, increasing its potential for allergenicity. Buying
organic soy products is one way to lessen potential reactions.


===PAGE 123===
In a large skillet, heat the oil; add the onions, garlic, mushrooms, and
broccoli. Sauté on medium-high heat until the onions are translucent.
Add crumbled tofu to pan. Add all of the remaining ingredients and
sauté until moisture has evaporated and vegetables are tender, about 10
minutes.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You can use any vegetables for this scramble, even leftover vegetables.
Healthy Tidbit
Tofu, made from soybean curd, is an inexpensive, high-quality source of
protein. Soy is a good source of iron, phosphorus, potassium, sodium,
and calcium. It also provides B vitamins, choline, and vitamin E.
Dr. Fisel’s Tofu Scramble
PER SERVING: 140.5 CALORIES ~ 12.1 G PROTEIN ~ 7.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.9 G FIBER ~ 8.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 277.7 MG SODIUM
I have gained inspiration for many vegetarian dishes from my good
friend Matt Fisel, N.D.
Breakfasts
109
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
40.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.4 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.4 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
253.7 mg
Niacin
2.0 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
217.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
56.7 mg
Folate (total)
120.8 µg
Zinc
1.4 mg
Vitamin C
21.5 mg
Potassium
412.5 mg
1 tablespoon olive oil
½ onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
5 mushrooms, sliced
1 cup chopped broccoli
1 1-pound package organic, firm tofu,
crumbled
2 teaspoons Herbes de Provence
1 tablespoon nutritional yeast powder
2 teaspoons kelp powder (optional)
1 teaspoon cumin powder
¼ teaspoon cayenne powder (omit if you
can’t tolerate spice)
1 tablespoon wheat-free tamari
Pepper to taste
Salt to taste


===PAGE 124===
Wheat-Free Pancakes
PER SERVING: 208.1 CALORIES ~ 4.2 G PROTEIN ~ 27.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 9.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 500.95 MG SODIUM
This recipe comes from a colleague who has exceptional talent in the
cooking arts, Erika Siegel, N.D., L.Ac.
½ cup walnuts, ground in food processor to a fine powder
¾ cup spelt flour
¾ cup rice flour
1 teaspoon cream of tartar
1 teaspoon baking soda
¾ teaspoon sea salt
11/3 cup water
1 tablespoon olive oil
Optional—sprinkle fresh berries, chopped apple, or chopped nuts 
into batter.
Combine ground walnuts, flours, salt, cream of tartar, baking soda, and
salt in a medium-sized mixing bowl, blending well.
Whisk 1 cup of water into dry ingredients, then gradually add the
rest of the water to reach desired consistency. Add more water if the bat-
ter is still too thick. Stir in any optional ingredients until just combined.
Brush or spray a large skillet or griddle with small amount of oil.
Heat skillet or griddle over medium heat. Drop batter onto hot cooking
surface using a large spoon. Cook the pancake until bubbles form on
top; flip. Cook on the second side until lightly browned.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
You can try other nuts (e.g., pecans) and other types of flour. If you
replace the spelt flour with a nongluten flour, you may need to add ¼–½
teaspoon guar gum or a blended banana.
Healthy Tidbit
Many people have wheat
allergies or sensitivities.
Symptoms can be as severe
as celiac disease, in which
no gluten is tolerated at all
and results in gastrointesti-
nal damage, or as minor as
110
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
12.0 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
0.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
54.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
22.7 mg
Folate (total)
10.6 µg
Zinc
0.5 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
198.5 mg


===PAGE 125===
Breakfasts
111
postnasal drip, cough, or phlegm. It is well documented that many neu-
rological conditions are related to gluten intolerance as a result of nutri-
ent deficiency due to malabsorption. Another newer theory is that gluten
proteins may cause direct immunological reactions within brain, nerve,
and muscle tissue, independent of the gastrointestinal system. If you suf-
fer from any neurological condition, it is worth a 4-week trial of gluten-
avoidance.


===PAGE 126===
Easy Pancakes
PER SERVING: 322.7 CALORIES ~ 18.4 G PROTEIN ~ 15.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 21.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 4.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 317.3 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 120.7 MG SODIUM
These pancakes, which have a delicious nutty flavor, offer a high amount
of fiber and can be made with virtually no flour.
3 tablespoons raw sunflower seeds, ground fine
3 tablespoons raw pumpkin seeds, ground fine
3 organic eggs
¼ cup nongluten oat flour (any nonwheat or nongluten flour will do)
¼ cup rice milk
¼ cup blueberries (optional)
Combine all ingredients in a medium-sized bowl and mix well until
clumps have dissolved.
Heat a lightly oiled skillet or griddle pan over medium heat.
Pour batter into 3-inch diameter circles in the pan. When pancakes
begin to bubble, flip and cook on the other side for a short amount of
time until lightly browned on both sides.
Serves 2.
Substitutions
You may add berries or other fruit to this recipe. If the fruit is frozen, the
batter has a tendency to clump around it; the pancakes still turn out fine.
Ben Unterseher, a massage therapist in McMinnville, Oregon, converted
this recipe into an amazing flat bread that is similar to pita bread. He
added 1 tablespoon fresh ground rosemary, 1 clove minced garlic, ½ cup
garbanzo flour, ½ cup soy flour (omit the oat flour above), 2 eggs
instead of 3, 1 tablespoon sea salt, and ½ cup filtered water. Pour batter
in 6-inch diameter circles instead of 3-inch and cook similarly.
Healthy Tidbit
With the rise in incidence
of celiac disease (gluten
intolerance), a demand has
developed for people to
find alternatives to high-
gluten foods. Gluten reac-
tions can include diarrhea,
abdominal pain, bloating,
112
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
148.8 RE
Vitamin D
1.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.5 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.5 mg
Calcium
72.8 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
4.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
459.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
1.0 µg
Magnesium
149.0 mg
Folate (total)
80.6 µg
Zinc
3.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.4 mg
Potassium
378.0 mg


===PAGE 127===
Breakfasts
113
flatulence, pallor, weakness, fatigue, and behavioral changes such as irri-
tability and depression, weight loss, delayed growth in children, missed
menstrual periods, bone and joint pain, seizures, muscle cramps, and
others. Complete gluten avoidance can improve and elimate most of
these symptoms in celiac disease sufferers.


===PAGE 128===
Breakfast Eggnog
PER SERVING: 303.3 CALORIES ~ 19.6 G PROTEIN ~ 20.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.0 G FIBER ~ 12.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 423.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 226.1 MG SODIUM
This is a very easy breakfast to whip together for yourself or your chil-
dren and offers a good source of complete protein in the morning.
2 organic eggs
1 cup rice milk, chilled
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Dash cinnamon
Dash nutmeg
Combine all ingredients in a large cup or bowl, and mix well until mix-
ture looks uniform.
Strain mixture through small strainer into a serving glass and serve.
Serves 1.
Substitutions
Soy milk or another alternate milk can be used in place of rice milk.
Healthy Tidbit
Many individuals are nervous when they see raw eggs in a recipe due to
the chance of getting salmonella poisoning. This is a valid concern, but
the risk of contracting salmonella from eggs is actually significantly low.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture has indicated that salmonella inci-
dence fell by 66 percent from 1998 to 2003. In the healthy individual,
salmonella poisoning is a self-limiting disease that is quickly recovered
from. Symptoms of salmonella poisoning include diarrhea, abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, and chills. It mostly strikes the elderly,
infants, and those with compromised immune systems such as cancer or
HIV sufferers.
114
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
191.0 RE
Vitamin D
1.3 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.6 mg
Calcium
94.4 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
3.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
291.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
1.3 µg
Magnesium
53.5 mg
Folate (total)
73.0 µg
Zinc
2.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
422.6 mg


===PAGE 129===
Breakfast Smoothie
PER SERVING: 601.2 CALORIES ~ 41.1 G PROTEIN ~ 79.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 14.4 G FIBER ~ 15.7
G TOTAL FAT ~ 1.9 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1073.9 MG SODIUM
This fast, simple breakfast can sustain your blood sugar until midmorn-
ing or lunch. Once you get the hang of it, you can make a smoothie in
less than five minutes, transfer it to a jar or mug, and be out the door,
almost as quickly as if you’d skipped breakfast. Make the time; it is
worth it.
2 tablespoons soy protein powder
1 cup organic frozen berries (blueberries, strawberries, raspberries,
blackberries, cherries)
2 cups soy milk (use water if you prefer, or half water and half milk)
Place all ingredients in blender and blend to desired thickness and consis-
tency. Serves 1–2.
Substitutions
You can use a rice-based protein powder, or, instead of protein powder,
you can use ½ block or more of silken tofu. Also, you can use any milk
substitute (e.g., rice milk, almond milk).
You may add the following ingredients based on your tastebuds and
your dietary needs. If you do so, you may need to use more liquid:
½–1 frozen banana, cut into chunks
2 tablespoons freshly ground flaxseeds (highly recommended)
1–3 teaspoons flaxseed oil or other omega-3 fatty acid oil
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1–2 teaspoons acidophilus or fructo-oligosaccharides
Healthy Tidbit
Eating enough protein with each meal is an important way to regulate
blood sugar levels. Consistently healthy levels of blood sugar lead to con-
sistent energy levels and fewer mood swings. Furthermore, having high
blood sugar for an exten-
ded period of time can lead
to diabetes, high blood-
lipid levels, and high cho-
lesterol levels.
Breakfasts
115
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
387.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.8 mg
Vitamin E
0.5 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
736.6 mg
Niacin
8.1 mg
Iron
8.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
767.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
222.8 mg
Folate (total)
229.9 µg
Zinc
4.4 mg
Vitamin C
27.1 mg
Potassium
1,315.4 mg


===PAGE 130===
Teas and Other Beverages
Herbal “Juice”  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .117
Chai  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .118
Calming Tea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .118
The Stress Reliever  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .119
Adrenal Support Tea (for energy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .119
Simple Mood Tea (to lift the spirits) . . . . . . . . . . . . .119
Cleansing Tea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .119
Detoxification Tea  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .119
Tea to Relax the Nerves  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .120
Easy Digestion Tea  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .120
Immune Booster Tea  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .120
Sleepy Tea  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .120
Almond Milk  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .122
Sesame Milk  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .124


===PAGE 131===
Mix all ingredients together and store in an airtight container for use as
needed. For each serving, use 1 tablespoon of tea mixture and 10 fluid
ounces (1¼ cup) of filtered water. For a gallon of tea (approximately 12
servings), use a gallon of filtered water and 12 tablespoons (3/4 cup) of
tea mixture.
In a tea kettle (for small quantities) or a large pot, bring water to a
boil. Remove from heat, add dried herbs and lemon zest, and allow to
steep for 10–15 minutes.
Filter into a large container through a very fine strainer or 2–3
thicknesses of cheesecloth. When tea is still warm, add honey to taste
and store in refrigerator. Serve chilled (or, if you desire, warm).
Yield: 2¼ cup dried tea mix, or approximately 36 servings.
Substitutions
Explore the dried-herb section of the bulk-foods department for many
different teas to blend together to suit your tastes and those of your chil-
dren. Be creative and adventurous.
Healthy Tidbit
According to a 2003 study by Cornell University, children who drank
more than 12 ounces of sweetened drinks daily gained significantly more
weight than children who drank less than 6 ounces. The sweetened
drinks were classified as soda, fruit punch, lemonade, or similar drinks.
Hawthorn, which tastes great in teas and tinctures, is a wonderful
healing herb. It supports circulation and cardiac function, including
regulation of blood pressure, by dilating blood vessels. Besides being
used for both high and low blood pressure, it has been used to treat
heart weakness, arteriosclerosis, and irregular heartbeat. It also offers
calming support of the heart chakra, which can lighten the mood.
Herbal “Juice”
This tea is an excellent replacement for fruit juice. Every child loves juice,
and here is a substitute without all the added sugars. And the hibiscus
makes it a very pretty red. Even if you sweeten the tea a little bit, it will
still be healthier than store-bought juice. Your kids won’t know the dif-
ference! All ingredients should be available in the bulk section of a well-
stocked natural-foods store.
Teas and Other Beverages
117
½ cup dried crataegus (hawthorn) leaves
½ cup dried crataegus (hawthorn) berries
½ cup rose hips
¼ cup dried hibiscus flowers
½ cup dried peppermint leaves
Zest of 1 medium lemon
Honey to taste (optional)


===PAGE 132===
The remainder of this section offers recipes for various caffeine-free teas
that taste delicious and soothing served warm, or refreshing and invigo-
rating served cool.
Instructions for brewing tea appear at the end.
Chai
PER SERVING: 61.5 CALORIES ~ 3.5 G PROTEIN ~ 9.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.1 G FIBER ~ 1.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 43.0 MG SODIUM
3 cups rice milk
3 cups water
1 cinnamon stick, 2 inches long
8 whole black peppercorns
2 whole cloves
4 cardamom seeds
½ teaspoon whole cumin seeds
¼ teaspoon ground allspice
1/8 teaspoon ground nutmeg
Serves 6.
118
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
23.3 mg
Niacin
0.2 mg
Iron
0.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
51.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
21.1 mg
Folate (total)
13.1 µg
Zinc
0.5 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
140.5 mg
Calming Tea
2 parts chamomile flowers
1 part passionflower
1 part hypericum (St. John’s wort)
1 part lavender flowers


===PAGE 133===
The Stress Reliever
2 parts oatstraw
2 parts lindenflower
1 part passionflower
1 part lemon balm
Adrenal Support Tea 
(for energy)
1 part Siberian ginseng
1 part gotu kola
1 part ginkgo biloba
1 part licorice
Simple Mood Tea 
(to lift the spirits)
1 part passionflower
1 part lemon balm
1 part hypericum (St. John’s wort)
Cleansing Tea (No steeping necessary)
Juice of ½ lemon
1 tablespoon pure maple syrup
8–10 ounces filtered water, cold or hot
¼ teaspoon cayenne (decrease if you can’t tolerate the spiciness)
Detoxification Tea
1 part burdock root
1 part dandelion root
2 parts licorice root
Teas and Other Beverages
119


===PAGE 134===
Tea to Relax the Nerves
1 part hibiscus flowers
1 part basil
1 part catnip
1 part lemon balm
2 parts peppermint
Easy Digestion Tea
2 parts peppermint
1 part fennel
1 part anise seed
½ part gingerroot
Immune Booster Tea
2 parts elderberry
2 parts echinacea
1 part licorice
1 part hyssop
1 part thyme
2 parts peppermint
Sleepy Tea
2 parts chamomile
2 parts skullcap
1 part passionflower
1 part valerian (optional)
Instructions
There are two different ways to make teas: infusion and decoction. Most
teas are infusions, created when herbs are placed in very hot water and
left to steep for about 15 minutes. A decoction is used when roots are
120
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 135===
involved. For a decoction, the roots need to be boiled for a time before
steeping to bring out their medicinal quality.
For an Infusion
Follow instructions for Herbal “Juice” on page 117.
For a Decoction
Use 1 tablespoon tea blend per 10 fluid ounces (1¼ cup) of filtered
water. In a saucepan or kettle, place the root only (not other ingredients)
in water and bring to a boil.
Cover, reduce heat to medium, and allow the water to simmer for
15–25 minutes.
Remove from the burner and allow the tea to steep another 10 min-
utes, covered. If there are other herbs to infuse with this tea, add them at
this time.
Filter through a very fine strainer or 2–3 thicknesses of cheesecloth.
Substitution Ideas
These tea blends are not set in stone; they’re just suggestions. I usually
make teas based on what I have in my herb cupboard. If I am missing
some ingredients, I use others in their place. Remember, you are the crea-
tive mastermind in your own kitchen. If you want to add lemon zest,
hibiscus flowers, honey, or other ingredients to your teas to make them
more palatable, feel free.
These teas are not medical treatments and are not meant to take the
place of medical treatment. If you have a serious condition, consult with
your naturopathic physician.
Teas and Other Beverages
121


===PAGE 136===
Almond Milk
PER SERVING: 105.3 CALORIES ~ 4.0 G PROTEIN ~ 3.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.9 G FIBER ~ 9.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 5.1 MG SODIUM
Almond milk, which is very simple to make, is superior to cow’s milk
because of its reduced allergen potential and its significant content of
plant-based essential fatty acids. When you’re short on time, you can 
buy almond milk in the health-food section of grocery stores or at any
natural-foods store.
1 cup raw, whole almonds
3 cups filtered water (more or less, depending on desired taste and
consistency)
Soak the almonds overnight in a small amount of filtered water.
Drain off the water. Rub each almond between your fingers to
remove the brown skin. Blend the skinned almonds with a small amount
of fresh filtered water at a high speed until they reach a smooth consis-
tency.
After blending, add water to reach desired taste and thickness. Then,
strain the milk through a fine strainer or two layers of cheesecloth. You
may add sweetener, but it is usually not needed if you use fresh almonds.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
If you want to make the recipe a little faster and simpler, use slivered
almonds, which do not have any peel to rub off after soaking.
You can make milk from many different kinds of nuts. Not all nuts
need to be soaked overnight to remove the peel. Always start by blend-
ing the nuts with a small amount of water, then adding more water to
desired taste and consistency.
Healthy Tidbit
Almonds contain a considerable amount of highly absorbable calcium.
One-fourth cup of almonds
provides 92 mg of calcium.
The calcium in cow’s milk
is not absorbed optimally
due to milk’s allergenicity;
therefore, almond milk is a
better alternative as a cal-
cium source. It is also much
122
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
39.2 mg
Niacin
0.7 mg
Iron
0.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
87.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
49.8 mg
Folate (total)
5.4 µg
Zinc
0.6 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
124.5 mg


===PAGE 137===
Teas and Other Beverages
123
less inflammatory. According to the principles of Ayurvedic medicine,
almonds help to mildly alkalinize the system and strengthen bones,
nerves, and the reproductive system. Almond milk also offers protein,
essential fatty acids, and important nutrients such as B vitamins, iron,
potassium, vitamin E, and phosphorus. 


===PAGE 138===
Sesame Milk
PER SERVING: 121.5 CALORIES ~ 3.2 G PROTEIN ~ 9.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.6 G FIBER ~ 8.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 2.6 MG SODIUM
This milk is jam-packed with important nutrients and protein. It’s a
great way to get some nutrition into your children. I like to mix equal
parts sesame milk and rice milk for a scrumptious drink on the rocks.
1 cup sesame seeds
3½ cups filtered water
1 tablespoon honey
2 teaspoons carob powder
Grind the seeds in a coffee grinder and combine with remaining ingredi-
ents in a large container. Shake thoroughly, and let sit for 15 minutes.
Shake again and strain through 2 thicknesses of cheesecloth or a
very fine strainer. Chill in the refrigerator or serve over ice. Keep refriger-
ated.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Experiment with other seeds or seed mixtures.
Healthy Tidbit
Sesame seeds are rich in fiber, essential fatty acids, potassium, iron, phos-
phorus, and vitamins A, E, B-1, B-3, B-6, and folic acid. Make sure to
buy unhulled sesame seeds to ensure nutrient conservation as many of
the nutrients are removed during the hulling process. Products such as
tahini often use hulled seeds; it is better to purchase tahini made from
seeds that have been hulled mechanically as opposed to chemically.
Chemically hulled sesame seeds have often been exposed to lye, which
denatures their protein and nutrients and sacrifices taste. Sesame seeds
contain over 35 percent protein, which is more than any nut contains.
124
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
179.5 mg
Niacin
0.8 mg
Iron
2.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
114.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
63.9 mg
Folate (total)
17.9 µg
Zinc
1.4 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
95.8 mg


===PAGE 139===
Entrées
Baked Tofu  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .126
Barbequed Kafta  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .128
Blackened Salmon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .129
Breaded Red Snapper with Mango Salsa  . . . . . . . . .130
Chicken Curry Made Simple  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .132
Coconut Almond Chicken  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .133
Dr. Erika’s Quinoa Stir Fry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .135
Easy Baked Chicken . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .136
Falafel Burgers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .138
Leftover Veggie Burgers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .140
Maki-zushi (Sushi Rolls)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .141
Lentil and Nut Loaf . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143
Mung Dal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .144
Cold Asian Noodles with Smoked Salmon  . . . . . . . .146
Pesto Pizza with Chicken  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .148
Mezza Luna Pizzeria’s Pizza Sauce . . . . . . . . . . . . . .150
Seared Tuna over Raw Vegetables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .151
Stuffed Chicken Breast with “Peanut” Curry Sauce  .153
Sweet Sprout Curry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .155
Thai Red Curry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .157
Simple Stir Fry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159
Turkey Meatloaf  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .161


===PAGE 140===
Baked Tofu
PER SERVING: 280.0 CALORIES ~ 17.7 G PROTEIN ~ 17.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.9 G FIBER ~ 17.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1,353.9 MG SODIUM
One of my favorite dishes because it is so versatile, baked tofu can be
stir-fried with veggies and served over rice (using the extra marinade in a
sauce), eaten in a sandwich with sprouts, or added to a salad of mixed
greens with a savory dressing.
1 pound extra-firm tofu
2 tablespoons sesame oil
4 tablespoons wheat-free tamari
2 tablespoons honey
3 garlic cloves, minced
1½ teaspoons grated fresh ginger
Drain tofu of excess water by placing it between two towels and putting
something heavy on top. I use a medical textbook, because it is heavy
enough to squeeze out any extra water.
While the tofu is drying, mix together in a sealable container sesame
oil, tamari, honey, garlic, and ginger. (If you want more marinade, just
increase the liquids proportionally.)
Slice the tofu into chunks or slabs, and marinate for at least 1 hour
(1 full day is better). Turn tofu periodically by inverting the container.
Bake at 375° F on a baking sheet for 10–15 minutes or until
browned. Flip and bake for 10–15 more minutes until browned. Broiling
for an extra 3 minutes produces a crispier tofu.
Serves 3.
Substitutions
The marinade is still yummy even without the garlic and ginger, so if
you’re feeling a little lazy, just skip them. You may also try the marinade
with fish or chicken; it works well with just about anything.
Healthy Tidbit
An article by Brunilda
Nazario, M.D., appearing
in webMD Medical News
on April 28, 2003, stated
that sesame oil may de-
crease blood pressure.
There are two great reasons
126
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
275.8 mg
Niacin
1.4 mg
Iron
0.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
242.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
91.2 mg
Folate (total)
30.5 µg
Zinc
1.8 mg
Vitamin C
1.8 mg
Potassium
273.9 mg


===PAGE 141===
Entrées
127
to include sesame oil in your diet. First, it is rich in mono- and polyun-
saturated acids (PUFAs), which are the good kinds of fat that lower
blood cholesterol levels. Second, it is low in saturated fats, which are the
kind that you should limit in your diet. Sesame oil also contains two
very powerful antioxidants: sesamol and sesamin.


===PAGE 142===
Barbequed Kafta
PER SERVING: 336.8 CALORIES ~ 26.1 G PROTEIN ~ 2.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.6 G FIBER ~ 24.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 9.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 114.9 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 120.2 MG SODIUM
Easy-to-make kafta is always pleasing. Impress guests with a Mediter-
ranean meal of kafta, hummus with rice crackers (instead of pita bread),
brown rice, and cucumber salad.
1 pound ground lamb
1 pound ground turkey
1 onion, grated or finely minced
2/3 cup finely chopped parsley
¼–½ teaspoon cayenne
½ teaspoon allspice
¼–½ teaspoon black pepper
Metal or wooden skewers
Mix all ingredients together well.
Take a small amount of the mixture and press firmly around the
length of a skewer. Repeat this process until all of the mixture is gone.
Bake or grill the skewers until browned. Serve over rice.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
You could use all lamb, but adding turkey reduces the richness of the
lamb.
Healthy Tidbit
Did you know that parsley can freshen your breath? Maybe that is why
it is found in so many dishes containing garlic. Parsley is rich in vitamins
and minerals, is an excellent antioxidant, and improves digestion. If you
are planning an herb garden, plant your parsley next to your roses; it
improves their health and fragrance.
128
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
39.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
36.8 mg
Niacin
7.3 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
246.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
2.0 µg
Magnesium
35.9 mg
Folate (total)
32.8 µg
Zinc
4.1 mg
Vitamin C
10.3 mg
Potassium
412.1 mg


===PAGE 143===
Mix seasonings together and spread onto a flat plate. Invert the salmon
into the seasoning, then flip over, making sure to coat all areas.
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium-high heat. Before the oil
begins to smoke, place salmon flesh-side down in the pan. Turn the
salmon after about 3 minutes. Continue cooking until flesh is still a little
rare in the middle when tested with a small knife, about 2–3 more min-
utes. Serve over fresh spring greens with a simple dressing such as vine-
gar and oil.
Serves 3.
Substitutions
Use this basic blackening season for fish, chicken, or turkey.
Healthy Tidbit
Cayenne has many uses. Because of its capsaicin constituent, it can be
used topically to treat pain from arthritis, shingles, neuralgia, and
pleurisy. Initially it may exacerbate pain, so use it with caution or with
supervision. Cayenne has also been used to treat colds, fevers, varicose
veins, and asthma.
Blackened Salmon
PER SERVING: 201.2 CALORIES ~ 27.1 G PROTEIN ~ 4.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.5 G FIBER ~ 9.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 43.1 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 883.7 MG SODIUM
Blackened salmon is always a hit. Vary the level of spice depending on
who will be joining you for dinner.
Entrées
129
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
54.1 RE
Vitamin D
18.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
106.2 mg
Niacin
17.7 mg
Iron
3.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.9 mg
Phosphorus
844.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
3.7 µg
Magnesium
46.9 mg
Folate (total)
11.5 µg
Zinc
0.9 mg
Vitamin C
2.7 mg
Potassium
541.0 mg
1–2 fillets wild salmon (approximately 
12 ounces total)
For the seasoning
1 tablespoon garlic powder
1 tablespoon dried parsley flakes
1 tablespoon dried basil
2 teaspoons thyme
1–2 teaspoons cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon ground black pepper
1 tablespoon olive oil (for cooking)


===PAGE 144===
Breaded Red Snapper with Mango Salsa
PER SERVING: 435.2 CALORIES ~ 31.8 G PROTEIN ~ 36.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 6.4 G FIBER ~ 20.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.9 G SATURATED FAT ~ 93.9 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 120.3 MG SODIUM
Who said you had to give up breading on your fish? This very simple
recipe is made even simpler if you prepare the mango salsa ahead of time
or the day before. Your guests will compare this meal favorably with any
they could get in a restaurant.
16 ounces red snapper fillets (about 4 small fillets)
¼ cup sesame seeds, ground fine
¼ cup sunflower seeds, ground fine
¼ cup almonds, ground fine
1 organic egg
1 tablespoon olive oil
Sea salt to taste
Mango Salsa (recipe on page 68)
In a medium-sized bowl, beat the egg with a small amount of water until
mixed thoroughly.
Pour ground sesame seeds onto a flat plate, ground sunflower seeds
onto another plate, and ground almonds onto a third plate.
Dip one fillet through the egg mixture, and coat with ground sesame
seeds by pressing it into the seeds, turning the fillet over to repeat on the
other side. You may have to use your hands to cover all areas of the fillet
with ground seeds. Set this fillet aside.
Repeat with the next fillet, this time coating it in ground almonds.
Repeat with a third fillet, coating it with sunflower seeds. After you are
finished, you should have at least one fillet with each type of coating.
Brush olive oil over a baking sheet. Arrange coated fillets on the
baking sheet and bake at 375° F for 10–15 minutes, until fish is flaky
but still moist when tested carefully with a small knife.
You can also cook the fish in a nonstick skillet with a very small
amount of oil over medium
heat. Cook the fillets on
both sides until flaky but
still moist, turning once
after about three minutes.
Serve with mango salsa
spooned over the top.
Serves 4.
130
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
787.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.6 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.4 mg
Calcium
171.2 mg
Niacin
6.1 mg
Iron
3.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.5 mg
Phosphorus
357.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.2 µg
Magnesium
106.9 mg
Folate (total)
67.7 µg
Zinc
1.7 mg
Vitamin C
63.7 mg
Potassium
812.4 mg


===PAGE 145===
Substitutions
Try other ground seeds (e.g., pumpkin). If you have just one type of
seed, use it to coat all the fillets. You can use any white fish, for example
sole, tilapia, cod, halibut. If you are unable to tolerate eggs, simply drag
the fillets through warmed coconut oil before coating them with the seed
mixture.
Healthy Tidbit
Part of the pleasure of indulging in wholesome foods is learning to savor
them by chewing thoroughly. You won’t want to waste any enjoyment
of this gourmet-quality meal by rushing through it. Chew slowly, and as
you do, take time to relish the crunch of the coating on the fish, the ten-
der flakiness of the meat itself, and the contrasting sweet and tart
essences of the mango salsa.
Chewing your food thoroughly is also important for health-related
reasons. Enzymes in the saliva do the initial work of digesting food while
it is still in the mouth. If you swallow too soon, you fail to maximize
nutrient absorption and you risk allowing larger food particles to burden
the system. Interestingly, thorough chewing has also been associated
with better memory, according to researcher Andrew Scholey of the Uni-
versity of Northumbria, in Newcastle, U.K. In the results of a study on
chewing and memory published in March 2002, chewing one’s food well
was associated with an improvement in both long-term and short-term
memory.
Entrées
131


===PAGE 146===
In a large saucepan, sauté garlic and onions in half of the olive oil over
medium heat. Add carrots and continue sautéing.
While carrots are cooking, in a separate saucepan sauté chicken in
remaining olive oil until done. To the saucepan with the vegetables, add
chicken broth, coconut milk, and cooked chicken. Add curry powder
and ginger to taste. (I use 2–4 teaspoons curry powder and 1–2 tea-
spoons ginger powder.) Continue to cook until flavors meld and sauce is
heated through, about 10 minutes.
Serves 5.
Substitutions
You can add any vegetables you like to this versatile recipe. Broccoli
always makes a good addition to curries.
Healthy Tidbit
Do not drink anything with your meals. You can drink a small amount
of water with apple cider vinegar before a meal, but do not drink any-
thing while you are eating
as doing so can dilute your
digestive enzymes and
decrease digestion. If you
must have some fluid with
your meals, drink small
sips of water occasionally
throughout the meal.
Chicken Curry Made Simple
PER SERVING: 366.8 CALORIES ~ 34.2 G PROTEIN ~ 12.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.2 G FIBER ~ 20.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 15.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 78.8 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 281.4 MG SODIUM
This recipe comes from my friend Stephanie Findley, of McMinnville,
Oregon. It’s perfect for those nights when you don’t want to spend much
time in the kitchen. To make the job even quicker, chop the vegetables
ahead of time. Serve over a favorite grain such as aromatic jasmine rice
or quinoa.
132
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1763.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
63.1 mg
Niacin
13.3 mg
Iron
3.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.8 mg
Phosphorus
400.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.3 µg
Magnesium
73.6 mg
Folate (total)
29.8 µg
Zinc
1.7 mg
Vitamin C
7.6 mg
Potassium
763.8 mg
1 large onion, chopped
3–4 cloves garlic, minced
1 tablespoon olive oil
5–6 carrots, sliced into sticks
1 14.5-ounce can organic chicken broth
2–3 boneless, skinless organic chicken
breasts (about 1½ pounds meat), cubed
1 13.5-ounce can coconut milk
Curry powder to taste
Ginger powder to taste


===PAGE 147===
Coconut Almond Chicken
PER SERVING: 505.3 CALORIES ~ 33.0 G PROTEIN ~ 48.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.8 G FIBER ~ 21.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 65.7 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 839.5 MG SODIUM
I converted this recipe from one for peanut sauce. Though the original
was meant to be served cold, I prefer it warm. Instead of the rice noodles
called for in the recipe, you can serve this rich and hearty dish with just
about any grain.
4 green onions, white part only, chopped
4 garlic cloves, minced
2 teaspoons olive oil
½ cup smooth almond butter
1 cup light coconut milk
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
2 tablespoons wheat-free tamari
1 tablespoon fish sauce
½ cup water
2–3 boneless, skinless organic chicken breasts (about 1½ pounds meat),
cubed
2 heads of broccoli, including the stalk, chopped
½ pound thin rice noodles, cooked according to package directions 
¼ cup roasted nuts, for garnish
¼ cup dried cranberries, for garnish
Sauté the garlic and onions in olive oil until softened and slightly brown.
In a blender, combine cooked garlic and onions with almond butter,
coconut milk, lemon juice, tamari, fish sauce, and water. Blend until
smooth.
In a large skillet, combine blended sauce, chicken, and broccoli.
Cover and cook until chicken is done, about 15 minutes. Before serving,
add cranberries and nuts. Serves 6.
Substitutions
For vegetarians, tofu works
well in place of the chicken.
For a lower-fat version, sub-
stitute an alternative milk
(rice, soy, almond) for the
coconut milk.
Entrées
133
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
86.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
115.7 mg
Niacin
11.8 mg
Iron
3.2 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.7 mg
Phosphorus
362.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.3 µg
Magnesium
124.5 mg
Folate (total)
64.8 µg
Zinc
2.1 mg
Vitamin C
52.9 mg
Potassium
655.5 mg


===PAGE 148===
134
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Healthy Tidbit
Coconut is a great source of plant-based fat, especially for vegetarians.
Be aware that coconut oil is a saturated fat and should therefore be used
sparingly if you have poor lipid profiles. Coconut tonifies the heart and
has been useful in quenching thirst, supporting diabetes treatment, and
decreasing edema. It helps to nurture the body and can increase semen,
build up the blood, increase energy, and develop body mass due to its
fat content.


===PAGE 149===
In a small saucepan, bring quinoa, 2/3 cup water, and 1/8 teaspoon salt to
a boil. Cover, reduce heat to medium, and simmer for 15 minutes.
In a deep, large pan over medium heat, sauté mustard and cumin
seeds in olive oil until mustard seeds pop. Add onions, and sauté on low
heat until onions soften.
Immediately add kale, carrots, broccoli, and ½ cup filtered water.
Sauté 3–5 minutes on low to medium heat, till the vegetables are crisp-
tender. Add remaining ingredients; combine all in a large bowl with
cooked quinoa.
Serve warm or cool.
Serves 2.
Substitutions
This recipe works well with many different vegetables, so feel free to
improvise based on what is in your refrigerator.
Healthy Tidbit
Mustard seeds stimulate
circulation and have been
used to treat bronchitis, in
poultices, and to reduce
inflammation in joints.
Dr. Erika’s Quinoa Stir Fry
PER SERVING: 284.3 CALORIES ~ 8.6 G PROTEIN ~ 40.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 7.2 G FIBER ~ 11.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 239.5 MG SODIUM
Erika Siegel, N.D., L.Ac., who contributed this recipe, calls this salad a
“prescription for nutrients.”
It tastes great any time of year, makes tasty leftovers, and can com-
plement most dinners, so be sure to keep it in your repertoire.
Entrées
135
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
2,150.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
143.0 mg
Niacin
2.4 mg
Iron
4.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.5 mg
Phosphorus
235.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
105.3 mg
Folate (total)
101.4 µg
Zinc
1.7 mg
Vitamin C
125.9 mg
Potassium
924.0 mg
1/3 cup quinoa
2/3 cup plus ½ cup filtered water
1/8 teaspoon salt
1 tablespoon olive oil
¼ teaspoon mustard seeds
½ teaspoon whole cumin seeds
1 medium onion, chopped
4 large kale leaves, chopped
2 large carrots, chopped
2 cups chopped broccoli (heads and
stem)
1 teaspoon sesame oil
Dash of sea salt or wheat-free tamari
¼ cup raisins and/or ¼ cup chopped
almonds (optional), for garnish


===PAGE 150===
Easy Baked Chicken
PER SERVING: 510.5 CALORIES ~ 56.3 G PROTEIN ~ 46.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 8.4 G FIBER ~ 10.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.8 G SATURATED FAT ~ 131.4 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 475.7 MG SODIUM
Pam Quataert brought this dish to a potluck supper. I was so impressed
that I had to include it in this book.
1½ cups organic chicken broth
1 teaspoon dried thyme
1 cup rice wine vinegar
1½ tablespoons miso paste
1 tablespoon garlic powder
1 large onion, sliced
1½ pounds yams, sliced
5 large carrots, quartered, or 25 baby carrots
6–8 organic boneless, skinless chicken breasts (about 3 pounds total)
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons dried parsley
Dash cayenne pepper
Preheat oven to 475° F.
In a small mixing bowl, combine chicken broth, thyme, rice wine
vinegar, miso paste, and garlic powder.
Place sliced vegetables in a 13 x 9-inch baking dish. Arrange chicken
breasts on top. Pour broth mixture over the chicken, and sprinkle with
olive oil, parsley, and cayenne pepper.
Bake at 475° F, covered, for 1 hour, or until meat is browned. Turn
the meat once after about 30 minutes. Serve warm with a green salad or
brown rice. Serves 6.
Substitutions
Boneless, skinless organic turkey breast works well, too. Experiment
with other seasonings (e.g.,
rosemary in place of thyme)
and other vegetables. Pre-
pare everything in the
morning or the night
before, so when you get
home from work you can
just preheat the oven and
pop it in.
136
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
2,894.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.3 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
97.8 mg
Niacin
22.0 mg
Iron
3.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
1.5 mg
Phosphorus
533.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.6 µg
Magnesium
89.5 mg
Folate (total)
51.0 µg
Zinc
2.5 mg
Vitamin C
24.6 mg
Potassium
1,837.4 mg


===PAGE 151===
Entrées
137
Healthy Tidbit
One of the most important ways to balance the endocrine system is to
establish a regular daily routine, including when you eat, when you get
up in the morning, and when you go to sleep. Eating at the same time
each day prepares your body for digestion at that time of day. Having a
regular sleep-wake cycle helps to balance thyroid and adrenal function.


===PAGE 152===
In a large skillet over medium heat, sauté onions in 1 tablespoon olive
oil until soft. Add garlic, cumin, seeds and carrot. Sauté for 2 more min-
utes. Transfer to a large bowl.
Add drained chickpeas; mash by hand or in a food processor. Add
tahini and parsley.
In a smaller bowl, combine chickpea flour, baking soda, and salt.
Add to mashed chickpea mixture in large bowl, and mix well. With
floured hands, form 4 patties and lightly dust with remaining tablespoon
chickpea flour.
Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add
patties to skillet. After 1 minute, or when browning begins, flip the pat-
ties. Cook for about 2 minutes before flipping again. Keep cooking,
turning every minute or two, until they are a deep golden brown on
both sides.
Squeeze fresh lemon juice on top. Serve immediately with hummus
or baba ghanoush.
Serves 4.
Healthy Tidbit
The traditional diets of
Mediterranean peoples
have been extensively stud-
ied in recent years due to
the low incidence of
Falafel Burgers
PER SERVING: 301.9 CALORIES ~ 9.5 G PROTEIN ~ 41.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 7.9 G FIBER ~ 11.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1,090.7 MG SODIUM
These delicious Mediterranean burgers can be served with many different
side dishes. This recipe comes from my good friend and colleague Erika
Siegel, N.D., L.Ac.
138
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
877.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
84.7 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
3.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.7 mg
Phosphorus
204.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
66.0 mg
Folate (total)
141.1 µg
Zinc
1.9 mg
Vitamin C
21.0 mg
Potassium
523.0 mg
2 tablespoons olive oil
1½ cup minced onions
3 cloves garlic
1 teaspoon ground cumin
seeds
1 cup finely chopped carrot
1¾ cup (15-ounce can)
cooked chickpeas (garbanzo
beans), drained
1½ tablespoons tahini
(sesame paste)
¼ cup minced fresh parsley
1/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon
chickpea flour
½ teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
Juice of ½ medium lemon


===PAGE 153===
Entrées
139
chronic diseases and high life expectancies attributed to these popula-
tions. The Mediterranean diet delivers as much as 40 percent of total
daily calories from fat, yet the incidence of cardiovascular diseases in
some Mediterranean countries is lower than in the U.S. Experts specu-
late that the difference must be due in part to the type of fat that is con-
sumed: In the traditional Mediterrranean diet, olive oil is used gener-
ously, fish is eaten often, and red meat is eaten sparingly.


===PAGE 154===
Leftover Veggie Burgers
This is one of those recipes that always comes through in a pinch. It
turns out different every time and transforms your leftovers into some-
thing fun to eat. Note: We didn’t include nutritional information because
the point of this recipe is to experiment with whatever leftovers you have
on hand.
1 cup leftover cooked vegetables (stir-fried, steamed, etc.)
½ cup leftover cooked brown rice, quinoa, etc., from previous night
2 organic eggs, beaten
½ mashed banana (optional), as a binding agent
Preheat oven to 375° F.
Combine all ingredients in a blender; blend until the vegetables and
grains are finely chopped. Form the mixture into patties, and place them
on a greased baking pan. Bake until crisp around the edges, about 18
minutes.
Another option is to chop the leftover veggies in a chopper or food
processor, and then mix them with the other ingredients in a bowl, using
your hands. If you don’t have either a chopper or a blender, just mince
the vegetables by hand and mix them with the remaining ingredients.
You shouldn’t need to season the burgers, because your meal from the
night before will have already been seasoned.
Serves 2.
Substitutions
You can add so many different things to these burgers. Try tuna fish,
cooked beans of any kind, nuts, or seeds. If you cannot tolerate eggs, use
another binder from the substitutions table in the Appendix.
Healthy Tidbit
This is a much healthier burger than one containing red meat, which
increases levels of arachidonic acid in the body and can lead to inflam-
mation. It is also better for lipid levels and digestive tract health.
140
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 155===
Maki-zushi (Sushi Rolls)
PER SERVING: 461.7 CALORIES ~ 9.3 G PROTEIN ~ 92.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.8 G FIBER ~ 6.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 207.2 MG SODIUM
Restaurant sushi is expensive and often contains sugar in the rice. It is
fun and easy to make your own sushi rolls at home. You can do some
amazing things with rice and a sheet of toasted seaweed. I use a combi-
nation of white and brown rice, upping the nutritional quality, and I
usually make vegetarian rolls.
2 cups short-grain brown rice
11/3 cups short-grain white rice
5 cups filtered water
4 tablespoons rice vinegar
½ tablespoon salt
1½ tablespoon maple syrup or brown rice syrup
8 sheets toasted seaweed
1 cucumber, sliced lengthwise in very thin slices
1 carrot, sliced lengthwise in very thin slices
1 avocado, sliced lengthwise in very thin slices
Wheat-free tamari for dipping
Wasabi paste, to be added as a spice to tamari dipping sauce
Toasted sesame seeds, to sprinkle on top
Special equipment: 1 sushi roller and paddle (available at Asian
grocers for under $5)
Combine rice and water in a medium saucepan, cover, and bring to a
boil. Boil for about 2 minutes.
Meanwhile, prepare vinegar mixture by combining vinegar, salt, and
sweetener.
Reduce heat to medium, and boil for 5 more minutes. Add the vine-
gar mixture directly to the rice and water. Then reduce heat to very low
and simmer for about 15
minutes or until water has
been absorbed. 
While rice is cooking,
prepare vegetables by cut-
ting them into thin, long
strips.
Entrées
141
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
351.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.4 mg
Vitamin E
0.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
45.8 mg
Niacin
5.2 mg
Iron
3.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.5 mg
Phosphorus
229.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
117.5 mg
Folate (total)
101.3 µg
Zinc
2.3 mg
Vitamin C
6.2 mg
Potassium
447.3 mg


===PAGE 156===
142
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
When rice is finished, remove from heat and allow to cool.
Place one sheet of seaweed on sushi roller, making sure to arrange
the sheet so that the perforation will aid in cutting the roll once you
assemble it. Place the seaweed sheet so the rough side faces up (i.e., will
be in contact with the rice).
Spoon a small amount of rice onto seaweed sheet, and pat it flat
with the sushi paddle, leaving a border of ½–1 inch without rice at the
top edge of the seaweed sheet.
Place 1–2 strips of each vegetable on top of the rice at the bottom
edge of the seaweed sheet. Use sushi roller to roll it up, like a jelly roll.
With a very sharp, serrated, clean knife, cut the roll into 3/4-inch maki-
zushi, or sushi rolls.
Note: As with anything, learning to make sushi rolls can take a little
practice. Your earliest ones will still taste great, however, so use them as
“tasters” until you have a better handle on the technique. Helpful hints:
Clean the knife between each roll, or dip into water periodically to
remove rice buildup. Allow yourself plenty of time to get the feel of it.
Sometimes using less rice and fewer vegetables can make it easier to roll.
Sprinkle the rolls with toasted sesame seeds, arrange on a platter,
and serve immediately. Each person should get his/her own sauce dish to
mix tamari and wasabi to desired taste.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
Sushi rolls are very fun to experiment with. Ideas for veggies include
radishes, bok choy, or pickles. Tofu cut into long, thin slices works well.
Try adding smoked salmon or sushi-grade raw fish. Or just serve the
raw fish over sticky rice. Adding toasted sesame seeds to the rice is
another fun idea.
Healthy Tidbit
From a nutritional standpoint it is almost hard to pick out the best char-
acteristics of seaweed, because it contains more vitamins and minerals
than any other class of food. It is high in calcium, iodine, phosphorus,
sodium, and iron. It is a rich source of protein and of vitamins A, B-
complex, C, and E. Due to its iodine content, seaweed can also support
thyroid function; it can help to reduce a goiter that is related to
hypothyroidism.


===PAGE 157===
Soak lentils for at least 3 hours, and then simmer for 20 minutes or until
softened.
Preheat oven to 350° F.
Sauté garlic and onions with olive oil in a small skillet over medium
heat for 3–5 minutes. Mix all ingredients together and press into a
greased 9 x 5-inch loaf pan.
Bake for 1 hour or until cooked through.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
Experiment with any ground nut or a combination of 2 or 3 types of
nuts. In place of the rice, try cooked amaranth, cooked quinoa, or 2
cups nonwheat bread crumbs.
Healthy Tidbit
Beans and legumes strengthen kidneys and adrenal glands, thereby pro-
moting cellular regeneration, physical growth, and elimination. By sup-
porting adrenal function, they help with the stress response, blood sugar
regulation, blood pressure
regulation, and sex hor-
mone production.
Lentil and Nut Loaf
PER SERVING: 541.2 CALORIES ~ 20.6 G PROTEIN ~ 50.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 16.3 G FIBER ~ 31.1
G TOTAL FAT ~ 3.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 70.5 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 262.0 MG SODIUM
This is a good vegetarian option for meatloaf. Serve it with roasted vege-
tables or a salad.
Entrées
143
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
48.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.5 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
97.4 mg
Niacin
2.4 mg
Iron
4.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.6 mg
Phosphorus
402.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.2 µg
Magnesium
141.5 mg
Folate (total)
151.2 µg
Zinc
3.6 mg
Vitamin C
97.4 mg
Potassium
607.5 mg
8 ounces dried lentils
1 large onion, chopped
8 cloves of garlic, cut in half
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
2 cups walnuts, ground
2 cups cooked brown rice
2 tablespoons teriyaki sauce
2 teaspoons oregano
3 tablespoons fresh parsley, chopped
2 organic eggs
½ mashed banana
Sea salt to taste
Black pepper to taste


===PAGE 158===
Mung Dal
PER SERVING: 258.5 CALORIES ~ 11.2 G PROTEIN ~ 46.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 11.0 G FIBER ~ 3.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 202.2 MG SODIUM
Dal is a Hindi word for all types of dried beans, split peas, and lentils.
There are many different varieties of dal, all of which have a specific use
in Indian cooking. Mung dal is made from the beans of the mung plant.
This recipe is from my good friend Chelsea Phillips, MSOM, who is an
acupuncturist practicing in Bend, Oregon.
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 tablespoon black mustard seeds
1 bunch green onions, chopped small
1 cup basmati rice
1 cup yellow mung dal (from Indian markets or some health-food stores)
6 cups filtered water
1 large handful cilantro, minced
¼ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon coriander
¼ teaspoon turmeric
¼ teaspoon ginger powder
½ teaspoon sea salt
Sauté mustard seeds in olive oil over medium heat until they begin to
pop. Add the green onions and sauté until onions are soft.
Rinse and drain rice.
Combine all ingredients, including the sautéed onions and mustard
seeds, in a large saucepan.
Bring to a boil, reduce heat to medium-low, cover, and simmer for
25–30 minutes or until rice is cooked.
Serve warm with steamed vegetables or a green salad.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
You may be able to use
lentils in place of the mung
dal.
Healthy Tidbit
Coriander—and the herb
that grows from it,
cilantro—is commonly
144
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
13.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
45.9 mg
Niacin
0.8 mg
Iron
3.2 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
144.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
37.6 mg
Folate (total)
95.9 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
7.0 mg
Potassium
329.8 mg


===PAGE 159===
Entrées
145
used in Middle Eastern and Asian cooking. The Egyptians used it as an
aphrodisiac and the Greeks used it to flavor their wines. Coriander is a
mild sedative, aids digestion, reduces gas and bloating, and eases
migraines. The essential oil is used in massage oils and may be helpful
for cramps and facial neuralgia.


===PAGE 160===
Cold Asian Noodles with Smoked Salmon
PER SERVING: 669.7 CALORIES ~ 17.8 G PROTEIN ~ 110.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.4 G FIBER ~ 17.0
G TOTAL FAT ~ 2.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 13.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1,690.7 MG SODIUM
Even though this is a salad, my family loves it for dinner. It is large
enough to feed two as a main course; if you are feeding more, double the
recipe.
8 ounces rice noodles
1 cucumber, peeled and cut into thin strips
1 yellow pepper, cut into thin strips
4 ounces smoked salmon, sliced (try to get salmon with no nitrites,
preservatives, or added colors)
3–4 tablespoon teriyaki sauce
2 tablespoons rice vinegar
2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil
2 tablespoons toasted sesame seeds, for garnish
Cook rice noodles according to package directions. I usually bring a pot
of water to boil, add the noodles, turn off the burner, and let them cook
for 5–7 minutes until they reach the desired texture.
Slice the cucumber, yellow pepper, and salmon while the noodles are
softening.
Whisk together the teriyaki sauce, rice vinegar, and sesame oil.
When the noodles are finished, rinse them with cold water, and toss
them with the dressing.
In a large serving bowl, combine noodles with cucumber, yellow
pepper, and salmon.
Garnish with sesame seeds and serve chilled.
Serves 2.
Substitutions
Try cooked chicken instead of smoked salmon. Try red pepper, radishes,
or carrots in place of yel-
low pepper.
Healthy Tidbit
Salmon is a wonderful
source of omega-3 essential
fatty acids, which makes it
the ideal food for the anti-
inflammatory diet (omega-3
146
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
68.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
67.7 mg
Niacin
4.2 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
366.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
1.8 µg
Magnesium
71.0 mg
Folate (total)
44.7 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
174.9 mg
Potassium
612.4 mg


===PAGE 161===
Entrées
147
fatty acids help to reduce inflammation). Salmon that is harvested from
the wild offers the highest content of essential fatty acids. Farm-raised
salmon contain fewer fatty acids, and the fish are given feed that has
been dyed to give their flesh the pink color that occurs naturally in wild
salmon. Whenever possible, buy wild salmon. You will notice a differ-
ence in taste, and your body will benefit from the higher quality of the
nutrients.


===PAGE 162===
Make dough as instructed in the spelt bread recipe.
Prepare pesto (or defrost a jar of homemade pesto).
Heat olive oil in a skillet over medium heat. Add garlic, onion,
chicken, basil, oregano, and any vegetables you want to include. Cook
until chicken is nearly done and vegetables are crisp-tender, about 10
minutes.
After dough has risen, preheat oven to 400° F. Divide the dough in
half and stretch flat onto two generously greased pizza pans.
Cover the dough with pesto, and top with sautéed onions, garlic,
and chicken, making sure to spread evenly. Then, sprinkle with sea salt
and pepper if desired. Finish with an even layer of grated cheese sub-
stitute.
Bake for 15–20 minutes or until crust is browned.
Remove from oven, allow to cool slightly, and serve with ground
cashews sprinkled on top. You’ll never know you’re not eating par-
mesan.
Serves 8.
Substitutions
Many cheese substitutes
contain small amounts of
dairy, so not just any sub-
stitute can be used. This
recipe is very tasty even
without the cheese substi-
Pesto Pizza with Chicken
PER SERVING: 277.8 CALORIES ~ 15.9 G PROTEIN ~ 5.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.6 G FIBER ~ 22.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 34.2 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 178.9 MG SODIUM
It may seem impossible to make an anti-inflammatory pizza, but this
recipe does the trick.
For the crust, follow the Spelt Bread recipe on page 93 (for two
pizza crusts, make one recipe)
148
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
87.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
55.6 mg
Niacin
5.8 mg
Iron
1.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
169.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
58.2 mg
Folate (total)
23.6 µg
Zinc
1.3 mg
Vitamin C
6.2 mg
Potassium
314.8 mg
2 cups Basil Pesto (see recipe on page 59)
1 tablespoon olive oil
3 cloves garlic, minced
1 medium onion, chopped
2 organic chicken breasts, cubed
1 teaspoon dried basil
1 teaspoon dried oregano
VeganRella cheese substitute, grated
(optional)
¼ cup cashews, ground
Vegetables, chopped (optional)
Sea salt to taste
Pepper to taste


===PAGE 163===
Entrées
149
tute, especially when you top it with ground cashews. Vary your other
toppings according to taste and availability.
Healthy Tidbit
Basil helps to restore balance to the lung and stomach meridians; there-
fore, it can help with complaints related to those bodily systems. It
calms the nerves, aids digestion, and has antibacterial and antiparasitic
properties.


===PAGE 164===
Place all ingredients in a food processor or blender and process until
smooth. Makes enough for a single 18-inch pizza or 2 smaller pizzas.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Top with any vegetables you want, and even try it without the cheese
substitute.
Healthy Tidbit
In the September 2005 issue of the journal Circulation, the American
Heart Association published new guidelines on diet and lifestyle to aid
in the prevention of heart disease. General dietary recommendations for
children age 2 years and older stress fruits and vegetables, whole grains,
low-fat and nonfat dairy products, beans, fish, and lean meat, balanced
with sixty minutes of strenuous exercise or play daily. The guidelines
recommended for adults include lowering intake of trans and saturated
fats, dietary cholesterol, and added sugar and salt; participating in regu-
lar physical activity; and maintaining a normal weight for height. This
recipe for pizza sauce meets
the dietary recommenda-
tions for both kids and
adults, as well as avoiding
the potentially inflamma-
tory effects of tomatoes.
Mezza Luna Pizzeria’s Pizza Sauce
PER SERVING: 184.4 CALORIES ~ 2.8 G PROTEIN ~ 13.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.6 G FIBER ~ 14.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 274.0 MG SODIUM
Mezza Luna Pizzeria, located in Eugene, Oregon, offers a tasty option
for a tomato-free sauce. Follow the recipe instructions for pesto pizza
with chicken (on the previous page), and just use this sauce in place of the
pesto.
150
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
170.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
12.5 mg
Niacin
0.3 mg
Iron
1.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
87.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
45.3 mg
Folate (total)
11.9 µg
Zinc
1.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.7 mg
Potassium
107.5 mg
1½ cups roasted red peppers (you can
purchase them in a jar already roasted) or
2 large red bell peppers, roasted, peeled,
and seeded
½ cup cashews (dry roasted, unsalted)
3 cloves roasted garlic
2 tablespoons olive oil
¼ teaspoon sea salt
¼ teaspoon black pepper


===PAGE 165===
Seared Tuna over Raw Vegetables
PER SERVING: 195.3 CALORIES ~ 28.9 G PROTEIN ~ 6.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.3 G FIBER ~ 5.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.9 G SATURATED FAT ~ 50.6 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 582.8 MG SODIUM
Many fish lovers agree that the best way to enjoy high-quality tuna is
served rare. However, if you have a difficult time eating partially raw
fish, you can bake or sear the tuna for this recipe until it is cooked all the
way through.
10 radishes, grated
3 large carrots, grated
½ cup chopped cabbage 
2 fillets of yellow fin tuna, sushi-grade if possible (about 1 pound of
meat total)
2 teaspoons olive oil
2 tablespoons wheat-free tamari (for dipping)
¼ teaspoon wasabi paste (optional)
2 tablespoons toasted sesame seeds
Combine radishes, carrots, and cabbage in a large serving bowl.
Heat olive oil in a medium skillet over high heat until oil is shimmer-
ing but not smoking. Cook the tuna fillets on one side for about 3 min-
utes, until they develop a thin (3-millimeter) layer of white, cooked flesh.
Turn fillets over, and sear for another 3 minutes or so until they develop
a white, cooked layer on that side. The fillets’ centers will still be pink.
Remove fillets from heat and slice lengthwise into thin slices; make
sure each piece has pink in the center and white around the edge.
Arrange the seared tuna slices on top of the grated vegetables; gar-
nish with toasted sesame seeds. Serve with tamari and wasabi for dip-
ping. Serves 4.
Substitutions
Another option is to serve the tuna over sticky rice, prepared as you
would for the Maki-zushi
recipe (see page 141). You
can use teriyaki sauce
instead of tamari for 
dipping, but make sure it
doesn’t contain added
sugar or wheat.
Entrées
151
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,306.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.5 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
85.9 mg
Niacin
12.2 mg
Iron
1.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
1.1 mg
Phosphorus
276.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.6 µg
Magnesium
84.0 mg
Folate (total)
23.4 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
8.1 mg
Potassium
737.7 mg


===PAGE 166===
152
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Healthy Tidbit
Radishes stimulate the appetite and aid in digestion; they can be benefi-
cial if eaten before or after a meal. Radishes are also antibacterial and
antifungal. Radish sprouts, which can be grown in 4 days, lend a spicy
hint to salads and stir-fries.


===PAGE 167===
Preheat oven to 400° F.
After cutting chicken breasts to form pockets, stuff them generously
with ¼–½ cup of the lemon rice. Bake for 25–30 minutes or until
chicken is finished cooking.
For the sauce, in a 2-quart saucepan over medium heat, sauté garlic
in olive oil. When garlic is soft, stir in the other ingredients. Bring to a
simmer, then reduce heat to low. To allow the flavors to blend, continue
cooking, stirring occasionally, until chicken is done.
Once chicken is finished, pour sauce over the breasts and serve
warm.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You can stuff the chicken
breasts with any leftover
flavored rice, grain, or
legume.
Stuffed Chicken Breast with “Peanut”
Curry Sauce
PER SERVING: 633.5 CALORIES ~ 46.5 G PROTEIN ~ 34.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 35.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 20.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 98.6 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 704.6 MG SODIUM
I invented this dish one night when I was having a friend over for dinner.
I was late getting home, my daughter needed attention, and I felt as if I
had nothing to cook. I had some leftover lemon vegetable rice, and I
decided to stuff it into chicken breasts and make a sauce for it. It turned
out great—like I had been slaving in the kitchen for hours. For the side
dish, I drizzled the same sauce over steamed green beans, which were the
only vegetables I had in the refrigerator. No extra work!
Entrées
153
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
47.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
100.0 mg
Niacin
17.8 mg
Iron
6.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
1.1 mg
Phosphorus
563.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.4 µg
Magnesium
166.5 mg
Folate (total)
45.0 µg
Zinc
3.2 mg
Vitamin C
13.6 mg
Potassium
929.7 mg
4 organic boneless, skinless chicken
breasts, about 6 ounces each, sliced
lengthwise to form a pocket almost as
large as the chicken breast (leave about
¼ inch uncut at both ends)
2 cups leftover Lemon Vegetable Rice
(see recipe on page 66)
For the sauce
4–5 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon olive oil (for sautéing)
1 13.5-ounce can coconut milk
2 tablespoons almond butter
4 teaspoons curry powder
1 tablespoon wheat-free tamari
1 teaspoon fish sauce
2 teaspoons honey or maple syrup


===PAGE 168===
Healthy Tidbit
When you sit down to any meal it is important to take a moment and
give thanks to the Mother Earth (or to God, the Buddha, the All-That-Is,
or your spiritual higher power) for supplying you with the nutrient-filled
food you are about to eat. Give thanks for all the plants, animals, and
humans who were involved in bringing you the meal—for the chicken,
the rice plants and olive trees, the many farmers and distributors along
the way. Also give thanks for the friends and family who are dining with
you. Give thanks for your health, for the health of your family and
friends, and for the willpower to eat well and remain healthy.
154
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 169===
Sweet Sprout Curry
PER SERVING: 214.0 CALORIES ~ 5.2 G PROTEIN ~ 43.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 7.5 G FIBER ~ 4.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 870.0 MG SODIUM
I love to grow sprouts with the anticipation of this dish in mind. Please
see page 170 for instructions on how to grow your own sprouts.
1 onion, minced
1 tablespoon cold-pressed, extra-virgin olive oil
4 carrots, sliced
1 apple, peeled and minced
½ cup raisins (omit if you are diabetic)
1 can organic chicken broth
2 tablespoons spelt flour
1 teaspoon sea salt
1 teaspoon curry powder
¼ teaspoon paprika
2 cups mung bean sprouts
2 cups alfalfa sprouts
In a medium saucepan, sauté onion in olive oil over medium heat until
soft. Add all remaining ingredients except the sprouts; simmer until car-
rots are soft but still have a little crunch.
Add the sprouts and simmer a little longer until sprouts soften but
still have a crunchy consistency. Serve immediately.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Any type of sprouts can be used for this recipe (see pages 170–171 for
some ideas). This combination is just my favorite. You can also use any
type of nongluten flour without changing the taste. If you are able to tol-
erate tomatoes, this dish is great with a can of crushed tomatoes instead
of organic chicken broth.
Healthy Tidbit
According to “The Fires
Within,” an article pub-
lished in the February 23,
2004, issue of Time maga-
zine, recent research has
been dedicated to the role
of inflammation in certain
Entrées
155
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
3,480.2 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
82.1 mg
Niacin
2.0 mg
Iron
1.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
221.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
42.5 mg
Folate (total)
68.9 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
19.4 mg
Potassium
840.5 mg


===PAGE 170===
156
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, cardiovascular disease, colon can-
cer, and autoimmune disorders. For example, doctors are finding a con-
nection between inflammation and increased incidence of cardiovascular
disease through an inflammatory marker called CRP (C-reactive pro-
tein). Instead of taking aspirin or other anti-inflammatory medication
for prevention of chronic disease, which can cause harm when used for
the long term, try eating healthier instead. Fresh sprouts, which contain
lots of fiber and nutrients, are an excellent choice of a food to eat more
of in your quest to improve your diet.


===PAGE 171===
Thai Red Curry
PER SERVING: 263.8 CALORIES ~ 6.5 G PROTEIN ~ 31.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.4 G FIBER ~ 14.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 12.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 448.5 MG SODIUM
Curry is one of my favorite dishes; using red curry paste adds a zesty
punch. This recipe comes from my good friend and colleague Dr. Matt
Fisel. Prepare this restaurant-quality dish whenever you want to impress
a dinner guest.
1 13.5-ounce can coconut milk
2 tablespoons Thai red curry paste
1 onion, chopped
4 kaffir lime leaves (find at a Thai or Asian market)
6 ounces raw pumpkin, chopped
5 ounces green beans, chopped
1 red bell pepper, cut into strips
3 small zucchinis, chopped
7-ounce can bamboo tips or shoots, drained and, if desired, sliced in half
2 tablespoons fresh basil leaves, whole or cut in halves
2 tablespoons lemon juice
2 teaspoons brown rice syrup
2 cups cooked brown rice
Combine coconut milk, curry paste, and ½ cup filtered water in a large
wok or saucepan. Bring to a boil, stirring occasionally.
Add onion and lime leaves and allow to boil for 3 minutes.
Add pumpkin to the wok and simmer over medium heat for 8 min-
utes, or until nearly cooked.
Add beans, red bell pepper, and zucchini, and simmer for another 5
minutes. Add water if the sauce is too thick.
Add bamboo shoots and basil and continue cooking until they are
warmed.
Add the lemon juice
and brown rice syrup; taste,
and adjust seasoning as
necessary. Serve over
brown rice.
Serves 6.
Entrées
157
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
211.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
57.4 mg
Niacin
2.5 mg
Iron
3.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.5 mg
Phosphorus
193.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
89.7 mg
Folate (total)
62.2 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
65.4 mg
Potassium
677.3 mg


===PAGE 172===
158
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Substitutions
You can make this dish without the lime leaves, but they do add a dis-
tinctive flavor. You can also use different vegetables—whatever you
have in your crisper drawer. To reduce the spiciness of the dish, reduce
the amount of red curry paste you use.
Healthy Tidbit
Pumpkin is usually known only for pies and seeds, but it can be great in
many dishes. A very tasty source of vitamins and minerals, pumpkin’s
nutritious orange flesh offers beta-carotene, potassium, pro-vitamin A,
vitamin C, and dietary fiber. Pumpkin seeds and pumpkin seed oil con-
tain zinc and unsaturated fatty acids that are effective in helping prostate
problems.


===PAGE 173===
Simple Stir Fry
PER SERVING: 112.8 CALORIES ~ 2.9 G PROTEIN ~ 11.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.9 G FIBER ~ 7.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 544.7 MG SODIUM
This is the easiest, most basic stir-fry you can fix. If you feel like experi-
menting with the foods in your refrigerator, this is a great place to start;
the vegetables I’ve listed here are just some ideas. Get creative and be
bold with your food choices. See the note below for some tips on select-
ing veggies for a stir-fry.
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 garlic cloves, minced
1 medium onion, minced
1 cup zucchini, sliced
3 large carrots, sliced
8 crimini mushrooms, sliced
1 large green pepper, chopped
2 tablespoons wheat-free tamari
Sea salt and pepper to taste
Other seasonings to taste (see below)
Sauté garlic and onion in olive oil over medium-high heat until softened.
Add other vegetables and seasonings; cook, stirring often, until vege-
tables are crisp-tender.
Serves 4.
Note: All stir-fries can begin tasting the same. That’s why it’s impor-
tant to get to know your vegetables and seasonings first. Start with a
simple stir-fry containing one or two vegetables and one or two season-
ings. Practice with the same combination until you have perfected it.
Substitutions
Ideas for seasonings:
— Red pepper flakes
— Dried basil
— Toasted sesame oil (1
tablespoon added at
the end of cooking for
a nutty Asian flavor)
— Curry paste (1 tea-
spoon)
Entrées
159
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,315.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
32.9 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
0.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
54.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
20.0 mg
Folate (total)
27.1 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
33.6 mg
Potassium
337.2 mg


===PAGE 174===
160
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
— Milk Thistle Seasoning Salt (see page 70)
— Nuts for garnish, ground or whole
If you include hearty greens such as kale, chard, etc., add a little water
to steam them
Healthy Tidbit
Members of the allium family—onions, garlic, and leeks—all contain a
phytochemical that affords protection from cancer. Onions are antiviral
and antiseptic. They should be included in the diet often, especially if
you are feeling ill or are fighting cancer. Members of the allium family
also help to decrease the tendency for clots to form, help to lower LDL
cholesterol, and help to decrease total cholesterol—all cardiovascular
risk factors. Garlic, onions, and leeks are very versatile. Eat them raw,
braised, boiled, steamed, baked, sautéed, scalloped, or grilled.


===PAGE 175===
Turkey Meatloaf
PER SERVING: 217.3 CALORIES ~ 22.5 G PROTEIN ~ 6.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.3 G FIBER ~ 11.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 11.1 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 415.1 MG SODIUM
This recipe requires little preparation time but needs an hour to bake. It
is simple enough to prepare in the morning and throw in the oven as
soon as you get home from work. I adapted this recipe from one of my
favorite cookbooks, The Complete Food Allergy Cookbook, by Marilyn
Gioannini, M.D.
1 pound ground organic turkey
¼ cup milk substitute (or chicken or vegetable broth)
1 organic egg
½ cup finely chopped onion
½ cup grated carrot
½ cup minced parsley or cilantro
¼ cup finely chopped celery
½–1½ teaspoon onion powder
½–1½ teaspoon garlic powder
½–1½ teaspoon dried oregano
½–1½ teaspoon dried sage
½ teaspoon salt
¼–½ teaspoon pepper
Preheat oven to 350° F.
Mix all ingredients in a bowl, making sure to blend well. (I use my
hands because that’s the most effective way to get everything well
blended, so dive in and have fun.)
Pat mixture into a greased 9 x 5-inch loaf pan.
Bake for 1 hour. Drain juices and serve by the slice. Kids will love it.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
The quantities of spices are
given in ranges because
some people prefer a more
flavorful meatloaf; in that
case use the larger quantity.
If you cannot tolerate eggs,
just replace the egg with ½
Entrées
161
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
494.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
57.6 mg
Niacin
3.9 mg
Iron
2.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
191.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.4 µg
Magnesium
31.3 mg
Folate (total)
34.4 µg
Zinc
2.6 mg
Vitamin C
12.8 mg
Potassium
382.8 mg


===PAGE 176===
162
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
banana or other binder. Also add ground or whole flaxseeds, pumpkin
seeds, or sunflower seeds.
Healthy Tidbit
Sage is anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, antimicrobial, antifungal, and anti-
spasmodic. It can also act as a mild diuretic, act as an astringent, and
stimulate the immune system. It stimulates the adrenals, greatly alleviat-
ing stress. Clary sage has been used for meditation and spiritual commu-
nication. The ancients considered it an oil of protection and psychic
sight. It is used to bless a house or a person to keep him or her safe and
grounded.


===PAGE 177===
Grains
Amaranth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .164
Barley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .164
Brown Rice  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .165
Millet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .165
Oats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .166
Quinoa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .166


===PAGE 178===
Barley
PER SERVING: 93.1 CALORIES ~ 3.3 G PROTEIN ~ 19.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.5 G FIBER ~ 0.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 3.2 MG SODIUM
Barley has a really good texture for soups and cereal. Buy nonpearled
(unhulled) barley because pearling removes more than 30 percent of the
grain’s nutrition.
1 cup barley
3 cups filtered water
Place water and barley in a 2-quart saucepan. Bring to boil, reduce heat
to low, cover, and simmer for 1 hour and 15 minutes. Alternatively,
place all ingredients in a crockpot and simmer on high for about 3
hours. Yields 3½ cups.
Serves 7.
You can grind your
own flour from barley,
which can be used to make
gravies or can be added to
other flours to make baked
goods and breads.
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Amaranth
PER SERVING: 182.3 CALORIES ~ 7.0 G PROTEIN ~ 32.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.5 G FIBER ~ 3.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.8 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 10.2 MG SODIUM
Amaranth does not contain any gluten and thus is recommended for
people who can’t tolerate that protein. It is rich in lysine, an essential
amino acid that many grains lack.
1 cup amaranth
1½ cups filtered water
Place water and amaranth
in a 2-quart saucepan.
Bring to boil, reduce heat
to low, cover, and simmer
for 20–25 minutes. Yields 2
cups. Serves 4.
164
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
74.6 mg
Niacin
0.6 mg
Iron
3.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
221.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
129.7 mg
Folate (total)
23.9 µg
Zinc
1.6 mg
Vitamin C
2.0 mg
Potassium
178.4 mg
Vitamin A
0.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
8.7 mg
Niacin
1.2 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
69.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
35.0 mg
Folate (total)
5.0 µg
Zinc
0.7 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
118.8 mg


===PAGE 179===
Brown Rice
PER SERVING: 114.1 CALORIES ~ 2.4 G PROTEIN ~ 23.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.1 G FIBER ~ 0.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 2.2 MG SODIUM
I often use organic short-grain brown rice because it cooks faster and I
prefer the texture. Brown rice is superior to white rice in many ways. It
has 12 percent more protein, 33 percent more calcium, more B vitamins,
and more of other nutrients. I only use white rice for one dish: sushi.
Brown rice can complement most dinners and it is good for breakfast.
You can also add cooked brown rice to baked goods for extra texture,
flavor, and moisture.
1 cup brown rice, short or long grain
2 cups filtered water
Place water and rice in a 2-
quart saucepan. Bring to
boil; immediately reduce
heat to low. Simmer, cov-
ered, for 30–40 minutes or
until all water has been
absorbed. Yields 3 cups.
Serves 6.
Grains
165
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
7.1 mg
Niacin
1.6 mg
Iron
0.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
97.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
44.1 mg
Folate (total)
4.3 µg
Zinc
0.6 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
65.3 mg
Millet
PER SERVING: 108.0 CALORIES ~ 3.1 G PROTEIN ~ 20.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.4 G FIBER ~ 1.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1.4 MG SODIUM
Millet can be used in place of rice or quinoa. It adds a crunchy texture
to salads and vegetable dishes.
1 cup millet
3 cups filtered water
Place water and millet in a
2-quart saucepan. Bring to
boil, reduce heat to low,
cover, and simmer for
35–40 minutes. Yields 3½
cups. Serves 7.
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
2.3 mg
Niacin
1.3 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
81.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
32.6 mg
Folate (total)
24.3 µg
Zinc
0.5 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
55.7 mg
Nutritional Analysis per Serving


===PAGE 180===
Oats
PER SERVING: 202.3 CALORIES ~ 8.8 G PROTEIN ~ 34.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.5 G FIBER ~ 3.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1.0 MG SODIUM
Oats are sadly underused. Don’t just think of them as oatmeal. You can
add them to soups and casseroles for a little extra body, or to cookies or
other baked goods.
1 cup oats
2 cups filtered water
Place water and oats in a 2-
quart saucepan. Cook over
low heat for 20–25 min-
utes. Yields 13/4 cups.
Serves 3.
166
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.4 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
28.1 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
2.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
272.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
92.0 mg
Folate (total)
29.1 µg
Zinc
2.1 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
223.1 mg
Quinoa
PER SERVING: 127.2 CALORIES ~ 4.5 G PROTEIN ~ 23.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.0 G FIBER ~ 2.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 7.1 MG SODIUM
One of my favorite grains, quinoa is very low in gluten. It complements
many salads, stir-fries, burgers, egg dishes, meat dishes—just about any-
thing. It is higher in protein than any other grain, and its protein is a
complete protein, meaning it contains all of the essential amino acids, a
quality shared by very few plant-based foods.
1 cup quinoa
2 cups filtered water
Place water and quinoa in
a 2-quart saucepan. Bring
to boil and then immedi-
ately reduce heat to low.
Simmer, covered, for
10–15 minutes or until all
water has been absorbed.
Yields 2½ cups. Serves 5.
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
20.4 mg
Niacin
1.0 mg
Iron
3.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
139.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
71.4 mg
Folate (total)
16.7 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
0.0 mg
Potassium
251.6 mg


===PAGE 181===
Salads
Avocado Bean Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .168
Home-Grown Alfalfa Sprouts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .170
Avocado Tuna Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .172
Beet and Bean Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .173
Colorful Coleslaw  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .175
Cucumber Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .176
Curried Quinoa Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .177
Curry Chicken Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .178
Curry Garbanzo Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .179
Garlic Bean Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .180
Italian Carrot Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .181
Mexican Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .182
Quinoa Vegetable Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .183
Carrot Beet Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .184
Spicy Honey Lemon Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .185
Spicy Raspberry Vinaigrette Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .186
Strawberry Spinach Salad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .187
Tasty Lemon Vinaigrette Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .188
The Not-So-Greek Salad  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .189


===PAGE 182===
Avocado Bean Salad
PER SERVING: 476.9 CALORIES ~ 9.2 G PROTEIN ~ 37.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 12.1 G FIBER ~ 34.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 4.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 8.3 MG SODIUM
Avocados are a favorite of mine. The beans give this salad added protein
and terrific flavor. Try this recipe for a light but filling lunch.
For the salad:
2 large ripe avocados, peeled and cut into ½ inch cubes
3 cups cooked beans (I like to use 3 different kinds of beans, e.g., pinto,
black, kidney, green, garbanzo, others)
½ cup chopped green pepper
½ cup chopped red pepper
6 large lettuce leaves (for serving)
For the dressing:
2/3 cup olive oil
2/3 cup rice vinegar
3 tablespoons raw honey
2 teaspoons chopped fresh parsley, divided
2 teaspoons chopped fresh coriander leaves (cilantro)
½ teaspoon black pepper
Combine avocados, beans, and peppers in a bowl.
In a separate bowl, mix dressing ingredients together, leaving half of
the parsley for garnish. Carefully coat bean mixture with dressing.
Arrange salad on top of lettuce leaves on serving plates.
Sprinkle with reserved parsley and serve immediately.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
Besides experimenting with
different beans, you could
add many vegetables to this
salad. Try artichoke hearts,
grated carrots or radishes,
or anything else you have
in your refrigerator.
168
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
122.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
3.8 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
56.4 mg
Niacin
2.7 mg
Iron
2.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
164.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
63.7 mg
Folate (total)
189.9 µg
Zinc
1.3 mg
Vitamin C
40.9 mg
Potassium
723.4 mg


===PAGE 183===
Salads
169
Healthy Tidbit
We should include at least some raw foods in our diets, because raw
vegetables and fruits contain enzymes that may be destroyed in the
cooking process. However, if you are in poor health or have compro-
mised digestion, you should eat steamed or cooked vegetables until your
health has improved. A good ratio of steamed to raw vegetables for
those with satisfactory digestion is 80 percent steamed to 20 percent
raw. This also depends on the season. For example, in the summer you
are able to digest more fresh and raw foods than in the winter, when
digestion slows down.
Many important vitamins and minerals can be lost in the cooking
and processing of foods. Vitamin C, for example, is especially vulnerable
to destruction by exposure to heat. Raw plant foods such as green leafy
vegetables, almonds, pumpkin seeds, and fruits such as avocado can
provide essential proteins, essential fatty acids, minerals, and antioxi-
dants often missing from grains.


===PAGE 184===
Home-Grown Alfalfa Sprouts
PER SERVING: 9.6 CALORIES ~ 1.3 G PROTEIN ~ 1.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.9 G FIBER ~ 0.2 G TOTAL
FAT ~ 0.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 2.0 MG SODIUM
Sprouts are so easy to grow, taste delicious, and offer a large amount of
the enzymes needed to aid in digestion. You can add them to salads, stir-
fries, and many other meals. Since childhood, I have loved to snack on
them raw. My mother taught me how to grow sprouts at a young age,
and I enjoyed tending to them with anticipation. Growing sprouts is a
fun project to teach your children. They will be so excited to eat some-
thing they have grown themselves (they forget that sprouts are healthy).
Allow four days for the sprouts to grow.
1/3 cup alfalfa seeds
Filtered water
Special equipment:
Large Mason jar
Cheesecloth
Place the seeds in the jar. Add enough filtered water to cover the seeds.
Cover the top with 2–3 thicknesses of cheesecloth, and secure with a
strong rubber band or with the metal rim that fits the jar.
Place the jar in a warm place away from direct sunlight. Let the
seeds soak for 6–8 hours.
After this initial soaking, rinse the seeds through the cheesecloth.
Drain out excess water. Then turn the jar upside down and place it on a
plate; this allows the water to drain. Rinse 3–4 times per day. Sprouts
should be ready to eat in about 4 days.
Serves 1.
Substitutions
If it is a bean, it will sprout. Even if it is not a bean, it will probably
sprout. The most familiar sprouts are mung bean sprouts and alfalfa
sprouts, but you could
sprout anything and it will
make your salads that much
more exciting. Try radish
seeds, soybeans, cranberry
beans, fava beans, lentils,
barley, rye, oats, chick peas,
mustard seeds, clover seeds,
millet, sunflower seeds—the
170
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
5.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
10.6 mg
Niacin
0.2 mg
Iron
0.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
23.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
8.9 mg
Folate (total)
11.9 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
2.7 mg
Potassium
26.1 mg


===PAGE 185===
Salads
171
list goes on. My favorites are alfalfa seeds mixed with a few radish
seeds. Be careful, because the radish seeds are very spicy (I expect mus-
tard seeds are, as well).
Healthy Tidbit
During World War II, when the United States was concerned about a
possible meat shortage, the scientific community advised the president
that the consumption of germinated seeds was the best and cheapest
alternative to proteins in meat. Many sprouts offer a complete protein.
In addition they are rich in vitamins, minerals, and natural enzymes. 
All you need are clean water and 4 days to grow a fully grown, crispy,
organic, tasty vegetable. Eat sprouts before a large meal to increase 
your digestive ability.


===PAGE 186===
Avocado Tuna Salad
PER SERVING: 222.7 CALORIES ~ 30.1 G PROTEIN ~ 4.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.8 G FIBER ~ 9.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 34.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 387.3 MG SODIUM
Try this salad when you want a nutritious, tasty lunch and don’t have
much time for preparation.
1 ripe medium avocado
2 6-ounce cans of light tuna, in water
½ teaspoon sea salt (optional)
¼–½ teaspoon pepper
Mash avocado. Add tuna and pepper.
Mix together, and serve on rice crackers, salad greens, or nonwheat
bread. My favorite is to serve it over lettuce leaves.
Serves 3.
Substitutions
Canned salmon can be used in place of canned tuna. You can add a little
cumin, thyme, or dried basil.
Healthy Tidbit
Tuna is a cold-water fish that is high in omega-3 essential fatty acids.
Because it can be a source of mercury, tuna should be rotated in the diet.
I generally suggest eating tuna no more than two times per month.
Heavy metals such as mercury have the potential to bind irreversibly to
sites otherwise available for regulatory molecules that assist in cellular
function. They can reduce immune function and interfere with regular
metabolism.
172
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
53.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.8 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
20.0 mg
Niacin
16.0 mg
Iron
2.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.5 mg
Phosphorus
214.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
3.4 µg
Magnesium
47.4 mg
Folate (total)
37.4 µg
Zinc
1.2 mg
Vitamin C
5.7 mg
Potassium
545.8 mg


===PAGE 187===
Beet and Bean Salad
PER SERVING: 215.5 CALORIES ~ 5.4 G PROTEIN ~ 21.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.3 G FIBER ~ 13.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 58.0 MG SODIUM
This delicious, nutritious salad offers a nice change of pace. When I
made it for a holiday dinner it was quickly gobbled down.
For the salad:
¼ cup hazelnuts
3–4 large beets, steamed until tender and peeled
1½ cups green beans, cut into bite size pieces and steamed until tender
1 cup cooked white beans
1 pear, cut into thin slices
1 leek, sliced (mostly the white part)
For the dressing:
2 tablespoons fresh dill or 1 teaspoon dry dill
2 cloves garlic, minced
2 teaspoons mustard, no additives or sugar
2 teaspoons balsamic vinegar
¼ cup extra-virgin olive oil
Cut cooked beets into bite-size pieces and combine in a large bowl with
green beans, white beans, pear slices, and leek slices.
Prepare dressing by whisking all ingredients together in a small
bowl. Pour over salad, mix well, and store in refrigerator for at least 1
hour before serving.
Roast hazelnuts on a cake pan in the oven until golden, about 6–8
minutes. Remove from oven, allow to cool slightly, chop, and set aside
until salad is finished marinating. Sprinkle hazelnuts over salad before
serving.
Serves 6.
Salads
173
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
22.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
65.5 mg
Niacin
1.0 mg
Iron
2.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
87.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
51.0 mg
Folate (total)
93.4 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
9.2 mg
Potassium
457.1 mg


===PAGE 188===
Substitutions
Canned cannelloni or navy beans can be used, among other beans.
Experiment with different vegetables, too. Using canned beans makes the
recipe easier, but do not use canned beets, green beans, or other vegeta-
bles as they lose their nutritional value during the canning process and
often contain additives and salt.
Healthy Tidbit
Nuts are an excellent source of protein. Enjoy them as a snack between
meals to stabilize blood sugar, or add them to any meal for a protein
boost. Different nuts offer different nutritional benefits, but, generally,
they are all high in essential fatty acids, and often high in calcium, sele-
nium, and other trace minerals.
174
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 189===
Combine cabbage and raisins in a large bowl. Pour boiling water over
them, cover, and let sit for 5 minutes. Drain.
Whisk together liquid ingredients. Add along with all other ingredi-
ents to cabbage mixture. Stir well. Store in the refrigerator for at least 2
hours before serving, to allow flavors to mingle.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
For a coleslaw that is less sweet, leave out the raisins, honey, and apple,
or use only half an apple.
Healthy Tidbit
Individuals with thyroid problems should not consume certain raw vege-
tables that contain goitrogens, substances that may potentiate a goiter.
Here is a partial list: brussels sprouts, cauliflower, cabbage, broccoli,
spinach, beets, kale, and turnips. These should not be eaten raw by any-
one suffering from thyroid problems.
Colorful Coleslaw
PER SERVING: 117.0 CALORIES ~ 1.2 G PROTEIN ~ 13.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.6 G FIBER ~ 7.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 24.5 MG SODIUM
This simple and sweet coleslaw tastes better than any other I’ve tried.
Salads
175
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,141.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
37.6 mg
Niacin
0.9 mg
Iron
0.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
37.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
14.9 mg
Folate (total)
22.3 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
27.3 mg
Potassium
270.4 mg
2 cups shredded red cabbage
2 cups shredded white cabbage
4 cups boiling water
3 carrots, shredded
1 apple, shredded
¼ cup raisins (optional; omit if you are
diabetic)
½ onion, chopped (optional)
2 tablespoons fresh cilantro
3 tablespoons olive oil or flaxseed oil
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon lemon juice
1 tablespoon honey
1 teaspoon horseradish (from a jar)
¼ teaspoon onion powder
¼ teaspoon garlic powder
Sea salt or tamari to taste


===PAGE 190===
Prepare salad by slicing cucumbers and onion and tossing together in a
large bowl.
In a separate, smaller bowl, whisk together rice vinegar, olive oil,
and maple syrup, and pour over cucumbers and onions. Toss together
and add sea salt and pepper to taste.
Serve cold or at room temperature. It tastes best if it has had time to
marinate in the refrigerator for at least 1 hour before serving.
Serves 4.
Healthy Tidbit
Cucumbers are cooling and thirst quenching and can relieve edema
(fluid retention). Use fresh slices of cucumber as eye compresses for a
refreshing, relaxing effect. Cucumber flesh is added to facial masks and
can help soothe sunburn. Cucumbers can cleanse and purify the blood,
thereby helping to restore normal health. They also contain a digestive
enzyme, erepsin, that breaks down proteins, cleanses the intestines, and
helps defend against para-
sites.
Cucumber Salad
PER SERVING: 45.0 CALORIES ~ 1.3 G PROTEIN ~ 5.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.0 G FIBER ~ 2.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 4.6 MG SODIUM
This salad goes well with most meat dishes. For a complete anti-inflam-
matory Mediterranean feast, serve Barbecued Kafta (see page 128), Nut
’n’ Curry Hummus (see page 64), Baba Ghanoush (see page 58), and
Cucumber Salad. Your guests will love it.
176
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
33.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
31.1 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
0.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
42.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
21.1 mg
Folate (total)
0.0 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
9.8 mg
Potassium
282.3 mg
For the salad:
2 large or 3 small cucumbers, sliced thin
½ medium onion, sliced into very thin
rings
For the dressing:
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon rice vinegar
2 teaspoons cold-pressed extra-virgin
olive oil
Maple syrup to taste (optional)
Sea salt to taste
Pepper to taste


===PAGE 191===
In a small bowl, whisk together all the dressing ingredients except the oil.
Gradually add the oil to the dressing mixture in a thin stream,
whisking until all is blended. Set dressing aside.
Fluff the quinoa with a fork. Add the remaining salad ingredients,
and mix well.
Add dressing, toss, and chill for at least 2 hours or overnight. The
flavors really come together as the salad marinates.
Serves 4.
Healthy Tidbit
It is the berry of the allspice plant, ground into a fine powder, that is
used as a seasoning. Allspice is a warming herb used to remedy chills
and to ease flatulence. The berries and leaves are also used to perfume
cosmetics and to flavor teas.
Curried Quinoa Salad
PER SERVING: 695.2 CALORIES ~ 8.9 G PROTEIN ~ 69.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 7.2 G FIBER ~ 45.5 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 6.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 315.7 MG SODIUM
This recipe comes from a patient of mine, Cyndi Stuart. This dish com-
bines two of my favorite flavors, curry and quinoa.
Salads
177
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
189.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
5.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
101.8 mg
Niacin
4.1 mg
Iron
6.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
246.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
112.1 mg
Folate (total)
92.2 µg
Zinc
1.9 mg
Vitamin C
73.5 mg
Potassium
852.3 mg
For the dressing:
¼ cup fresh lemon juice
2½ teaspoons curry powder
½ teaspoon allspice
½ teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon black pepper
¾ cup olive oil
For the salad:
2 cups cooked quinoa
1 bunch green onions, diced
1 medium red pepper, diced
1 cup raisins (omit if you are diabetic)
½ cup cooked or canned
chickpeas (garbanzo beans)


===PAGE 192===
Curry Chicken Salad
PER SERVING: 412.2 CALORIES ~ 33.5 G PROTEIN ~ 13.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.5 G FIBER ~ 24.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.8 G SATURATED FAT ~ 98.5 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 530.5 MG SODIUM
After enjoying a curry chicken salad sandwich in the deli of a health-
food store, I had to come up with a recipe for it.
1¼ pounds organic chicken breast, baked and cubed
½ cup organic mayonnaise (look for one with all natural ingredients)
½ cup diced celery
½ medium fuji apple, diced
¼–½ cup raisins (omit if you are diabetic)
¼ cup diced onion (optional)
2½ teaspoons curry powder
½ teaspoon turmeric
½ teaspoon salt or to taste
Dash of pepper
6 large lettuce leaves (for serving)
Mix together all ingredients, and allow to sit in refrigerator for at least
30 minutes. Serve on lettuce leaves.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
For a vegetarian version, try cubes of firm baked tofu instead of chicken.
Healthy Tidbit
Curry powder, a blend of traditional Indian spices, is one of my favorite
seasonings because it is so versatile. It is terrific for egg dishes, meat
dishes, salads, and grains. Begin experimenting with curry powder; you
can never go wrong.
178
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
29.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.1 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
34.3 mg
Niacin
16.1 mg
Iron
1.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.8 mg
Phosphorus
32.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.6 µg
Magnesium
52.4 mg
Folate (total)
32.6 µg
Zinc
1.3 mg
Vitamin C
5.4 mg
Potassium
623.3 mg


===PAGE 193===
In a small bowl, whisk together dressing ingredients. In a larger bowl,
toss all ingredients together. Before serving, allow to chill in the refrig-
erator for 1 or 2 hours or overnight.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Use less onion and less garlic if you want a milder flavor. For more heat,
you can add a small spicy pepper (e.g., a Thai or serrano pepper),
minced. Try different vegetables or legumes (e.g., lentils, black beans).
Adding roasted red peppers or sundried tomatoes, if tolerable, is a fun,
artistic touch that imparts wonderful flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
Cumin is an ancient Mediterranean seasoning that is used in many dif-
ferent cuisines, including Indian, Greek, Mexican, and others. It has a
distinctive flavor; therefore
you do not need to use a
lot. Cumin is a stimulant, 
a digestive tonic, and a
carminative, which means
it helps to relieve gas, or
flatus.
Curry Garbanzo Salad
PER SERVING: 172.8 CALORIES ~ 12.1 G PROTEIN ~ 35.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 9.1 G FIBER ~ 4.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 770.7 MG SODIUM
Here’s yet another recipe using the highly adaptable flavor of curry.
Salads
179
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
3.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
55.0 mg
Niacin
0.3 mg
Iron
2.2 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
17.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
7.5 mg
Folate (total)
10.1 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
11.6 mg
Potassium
128.4 mg
For the salad: 
2 15-ounce cans of garbanzo beans,
drained
½ medium onion, minced
2 stalks celery, diced small
For the dressing: 
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon tarragon
vinegar
2 teaspoons olive oil
Juice of 1 medium lemon
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 teaspoon curry powder
½ teaspoon cumin
½ teaspoon turmeric
Sea salt to taste
Pepper to taste


===PAGE 194===
Garlic Bean Salad
PER SERVING: 101.1 CALORIES ~ 2.2 G PROTEIN ~ 8.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.9 G FIBER ~ 7.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 7.3 MG SODIUM
Here is another great recipe from acupuncturist Dawn Berry, L.Ac.
1 pound green beans, blanched and cooled
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 teaspoons apple cider vinegar
½ teaspoon thyme
1 garlic clove, minced
1 small shallot, minced
Sea salt and pepper to taste
Prepare the beans by blanching in steam for 2–3 minutes until they are
bright green. Set aside to cool.
Whisk together remaining ingredients, and toss with cooled green
beans. Place in refrigerator to marinate for 1 hour before serving.
Serves 4.
Healthy Tidbit
Garlic is delectable roasted in the oven and used as a spread. Because of
its healing and antimicrobial properties, I make sure to include it in my
daily diet. When I have a cold, I make a drink combining 1 minced garlic
clove with a small amount of lemon juice, maple syrup, and filtered
water. I drink it morning and evening.
180
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
81.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.8 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
46.1 mg
Niacin
1.1 mg
Iron
1.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
41.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
28.3 mg
Folate (total)
28.0 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
14.3 mg
Potassium
223.9 mg


===PAGE 195===
Italian Carrot Salad
PER SERVING: 116.4 CALORIES ~ 1.4 G PROTEIN ~ 12.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.0 G FIBER ~ 7.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 40.8 MG SODIUM
I learned how to make this salad when I lived with an Italian family dur-
ing college. It complements any dinner or tastes great as a midafternoon
snack.
1 pound carrots, cut into 3-inch-long, thin sticks
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 teaspoon dried basil
3 garlic cloves, minced fine or pressed
Sea salt to taste (optional)
Pepper to taste
Steam the carrot sticks till crisp-tender.
In a small bowl, whisk together remaining ingredients.
Toss together carrots and dressing in a sealable container. Allow
carrots to cool, seal container, and invert a few times.
Store in refrigerator until serving time (at least 1 hour, prefereably
overnight). Periodically invert the container.
Serves 4.
Healthy Tidbit
Olive oil is a monounsaturated fat that can promote healthy lipid pro-
files in the body. It helps to decrease the “bad” cholesterol, or LDL cho-
lesterol, and increase the “good” cholesterol, HDL cholesterol. Because
olive oil is unsaturated and contains a double bond, it is easily broken
down by the body and incorporated into important hormones and cell
membranes.
Salads
181
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
2,885.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
43.2 mg
Niacin
1.4 mg
Iron
0.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
55.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
19.1 mg
Folate (total)
13.8 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
8.9 mg
Potassium
388.7 mg


===PAGE 196===
Combine lettuce leaves, radishes, and cilantro. Pour beans over the top.
In a small bowl or large cup, whisk together dressing ingredients.
Drizzle dressing over salad, and serve. Serves 4.
Substitutions
There are many ways to modify this salad. You can use tarragon vinegar
instead of apple cider vinegar. One of my favorite variations is to bake
salmon, season it with a little lemon, and place it on top of the beans
before adding the dressing. You may need to make a little more dressing
if you are adding salmon. Also try adding tomatoes, if tolerated, or avo-
cados.
Healthy Tidbit
Apple cider vinegar is helpful as a digestive stimulant if taken before a
meal. Stir 1–2 teaspoons vinegar into 4–8 fluid ounces of water and
drink it 15 minutes before eating. It will help to increase production of
stomach acid for the breakdown of food. Apple cider vinegar contains a
cholesterol-reducing pectin
and many minerals, includ-
ing potassium, phosphorus,
chlorine, sodium, magne-
sium, calcium, sulfur, iron,
fluorine, and silicon. It has
been used for centuries to
treat various conditions
and to aid in weight loss.
Mexican Salad
PER SERVING: 103.6 CALORIES ~ 6.2 G PROTEIN ~ 18.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 6.5 G FIBER ~ 2.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 470.6 MG SODIUM
I prepare this dressing often to top salads or fish. Try it with this salad
and with others; it will become a favorite.
182
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.2 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
96.2 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
2.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
53.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
14.8 mg
Folate (total)
33.0 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
16.1 mg
Potassium
547.2 mg 
For the salad:
1 head of red leaf or green leaf lettuce,
shredded
1 small bunch of red radishes, grated
2 tablespoons minced cilantro
1 15-ounce can cooked black beans,
drained
For the dressing:
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
3 tablespoons tahini
1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
2 teaspoons mustard (make sure it does
not have any ingredients excluded in the
anti-inflammatory diet)
4 tablespoons filtered water


===PAGE 197===
Quinoa Vegetable Salad
PER SERVING: 284.0 CALORIES ~ 20.8 G PROTEIN ~ 31.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.7 G FIBER ~ 9.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 46.7 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 84.7 MG SODIUM
It seems that no matter how I change this salad it always turns out good.
Amazingly, it contains no spices.
2 cups leftover cooked boneless, skinless chicken, cubed
1 cup cooked quinoa, or 1/3 cup dried quinoa
1 medium apple, peeled and chopped
2 stalks celery, chopped
1 medium carrot, shredded
¼ cup walnuts
1/3 cup raisins (omit if you are diabetic)
1½ tablespoons organic mayonnaise (with no preservatives or
hydrogenated oils)
4 large lettuce leaves (for serving)
Cook quinoa according to the directions on page 166, or use leftover
quinoa.
Toss all ingredients together, and serve chilled over lettuce leaves.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You could substitute many different kinds of chopped fruits, nuts, or
raw vegetables. You could use canned salmon or leftover turkey in place
of the chicken. This salad is even great if you leave out the meat com-
pletely.
Healthy Tidbit
Quinoa is a high-energy grain that is easy to digest. Unlike many other
grains, quinoa contains complete protein, meaning it has each of the
essential amino acids. It contains more calcium than milk, equals milk’s
protein content, and is high
in the amino acid lysine.
Include quinoa in your diet
often if you suffer from
outbreaks of cold sores.
Salads
183
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
585.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.8 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
42.2 mg
Niacin
5.7 mg
Iron
2.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
132.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
72.7 mg
Folate (total)
35.1 µg
Zinc
1.4 mg
Vitamin C
5.3 mg
Potassium
603.7 mg


===PAGE 198===
Carrot Beet Salad
PER SERVING: 156.1 CALORIES ~ 2.1 G PROTEIN ~ 13.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 11.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 329.8 MG SODIUM
My good friend and colleague Wendy Abraham, N.D., inspired this
salad.
For the dressing:
4 tablespoons apple cider vinegar
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 tablespoons mustard (select one containing no additives or sugar)
¼ teaspoon sea salt or to taste
¼ teaspoon pepper or to taste
For the salad:
½ pound carrots, grated
3 raw beets, peeled and grated
Mix dressing ingredients together; taste, and adjust seasonings as you
desire. Add grated beets and grated carrots; toss to coat with dressing.
Serve chilled.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You could try different salad dressings. You could also add a few grated
radishes for a hint of spice.
Healthy Tidbit
Beets are a blood tonic, which makes them great for treating anemia,
heart conditions, and circulation. Beet greens are high in many nutrients,
including calcium, magnesium, iron, phosphorus, and vitamins pro-A, B-
complex, and C. Be sure to save your beet greens for the next night’s
stir-fry.
184
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,443.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
2.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
39.2 mg
Niacin
1.2 mg
Iron
1.2 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
63.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
27.7 mg
Folate (total)
73.3 µg
Zinc
0.4 mg
Vitamin C
7.0 mg
Potassium
410.2 mg


===PAGE 199===
Spicy Honey Lemon Salad
PER SERVING: 145.2 CALORIES ~ 1.1 G PROTEIN ~ 39.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.0 G FIBER ~ 0.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 607.2 MG SODIUM
The dressing included with this salad is quick and easy when you want
something tasty to go on any tossed greens.
2/3 cup lemon juice (juice of about 3–4 lemons)
½ cup honey
2 teaspoons grated lemon zest
1 teaspoon sea salt
Generous pinch of cayenne pepper
4 cups of fresh spinach
Mix together all dressing ingredients in a small bowl. Pour mixture over
spinach greens and toss gently.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
I like to add grated radishes to my salad for extra zing. They comple-
ment the spice of the cayenne pepper in this dressing very well. If you
want a thicker dressing, make it slightly ahead of time and refrigerate for
a while, or add 1–2 tablespoons tahini and mix well.
Healthy Tidbit
Eating a salad before a meal is not just a custom that we have adopted
by accident. Eating salad greens offers the body a bitter flavor, which
stimulates the production of digestive enzymes and stomach acid. In
addition, the acidic lemon or vinegar in salad dressings also stimulates
digestion to begin. If you are given the choice, always choose to enjoy
your salad before your main course.
Salads
185
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
202.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
36.8 mg
Niacin
0.3 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
18.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
27.1 mg
Folate (total)
64.4 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
28.6 mg
Potassium
241.4 mg


===PAGE 200===
Spicy Raspberry Vinaigrette Salad
PER SERVING: 48.6 CALORIES ~ 1.2 G PROTEIN ~ 3.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.4 G FIBER ~ 3.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.9 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 19.3 MG SODIUM
This delicious dressing comes from Myra Wilbur of McMinnville, Ore-
gon, who has been very creative about experimenting with the anti-
inflammation diet.
For the dressing:
½ cup raspberries
¼ cup red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon coconut oil, warmed to a liquid consistency
Lots of black pepper
For the salad:
1 head of red leaf or green leaf lettuce, or a large bunch of 
mixed greens
Prepare dressing by blending all ingredients together in the blender.
Pour dressing over top of the greens and serve immediately.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
As with any salad, you can pretty much add anything and it will taste
great if the dressing is good. You can use olive oil or flaxseed oil in place
of coconut oil. You can use different berries, such as organic strawber-
ries.
Healthy Tidbit
Raspberries are very easy to grow in many different climates. Tea from
the leaves can be used in the last trimester of pregnancy to tone the uter-
ine and pelvic muscles to prepare them for labor.
186
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
2.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
28.9 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
23.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
12.0 mg
Folate (total)
31.8 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
6.7 mg
Potassium
167.8 mg


===PAGE 201===
Whisk together dressing ingredients.
In a large bowl, combine spinach, strawberries, and almonds.
Pour dressing over salad, toss, and refrigerate 10–15 minutes before
serving.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Try this salad with avocados, other nuts (e.g., cashews, walnuts, hazel-
nuts), and fruits (e.g., blueberries, diced pear).
Healthy Tidbit
Many of us do not eat enough green leafy vegetables. They offer many
nutrients, including calcium and lutein, which is a powerful antioxidant
for eye health. Lutein has been proven helpful in preventing macular
degeneration.
Strawberry Spinach Salad
PER SERVING: 465.2 CALORIES ~ 5.9 G PROTEIN ~ 34.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 6.7 G FIBER ~ 36.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 4.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 66.8 MG SODIUM
I found a version of this recipe on the Internet, which is a good resource
for recipes once you are comfortable substituting ingredients to make the
dish conform to the anti-inflammatory diet.
Salads
187
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
489.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
5.7 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.3 mg
Calcium
193.0 mg
Niacin
2.8 mg
Iron
4.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
153.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
121.7 mg
Folate (total)
171.2 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
102.7 mg
Potassium
758.6 mg
For the dressing:
2 tablespoons sesame seeds
1 tablespoon poppy seeds
½ cup olive oil
¼ cup honey
¼ cup red wine vinegar
¼ teaspoon paprika
¼ teaspoon mustard
1 tablespoon dried minced onion
For the salad:
10-ounce bag fresh spinach leaves,
chopped, washed, and dried
1 quart organic strawberries, sliced
¼ cup toasted, slivered almonds


===PAGE 202===
Tasty Lemon Vinaigrette Salad
PER SERVING: 294.7 CALORIES ~ 3.5 G PROTEIN ~ 9.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.6 G FIBER ~ 28.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 3.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 426.4 MG SODIUM
This was my basic dressing for years before I ventured to experiment fur-
ther. It tastes good, it’s easy, and I always have the ingredients to make it
in a pinch.
For the dressing:
¼ cup lemon juice
¼ cup olive oil or flaxseed oil
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
1 tablespoon pure maple syrup
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
1 teaspoon dried basil
For the salad:
1 head of red leaf or green leaf lettuce
½ cup kalamata olives, pitted and whole
½ cup pine nuts
In a small skillet over medium heat, toast pine nuts in a small amount of
oil until golden brown. Toss with lettuce leaves and olives.
In a separate bowl, mix dressing. Pour over top of salad.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Flaxseed oil is always a healthy substitute for olive oil in salads. And
besides experimenting with different types of fruits and nuts, you can try
adding grated raw carrots, radishes, or beets.
Healthy Tidbit
The olive tree is a long-lived, drought-resistant evergreen. That’s what
makes olives an excellent
oil-yielding fruit. Besides
olive oil, which is high in
antioxidants, the olive leaf
has antiviral properties. 
I have found olive leaf
extract to be very helpful in
treating herpes outbreaks
and chronic sinusitis.
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
188
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Vitamin A
18.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
2.2 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
52.7 mg
Niacin
1.8 mg
Iron
2.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
126.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
55.9 mg
Folate (total)
36.8 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
10.4 mg
Potassium
301.6 mg


===PAGE 203===
In a small skillet over medium heat, toast pine nuts in a small amount of
oil till golden brown.
Prepare salad by tossing greens with cucumbers, olives, and pine
nuts. In a small bowl combine all dressing ingredients and mix well.
Pour over salad and serve immediately.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You can add other favorite salad toppers, such as grated raw carrots,
fresh tomatoes (if tolerable), chopped red or green bell pepper, or sliced
pepperoncinis.
Healthy Tidbit
Garlic was used by the ancient Greeks for more than just feeding their
bellies. They would set it atop cairns at crossroads to propitiate Hecate,
the underworld goddess of magic, charms, and enchantment. Garlic has
many healing properties. It is antimicrobial, antiseptic, antifungal, anti-
parasitic, and has anticancer effects. It is warming, stimulating, and helps
to stabilize blood sugar lev-
els. Garlic helps thin the
blood, thereby reducing
cardiovascular risk. These
are only a few of garlic’s
magical powers; I suggest
you experiment with it
often in your cooking.
The Not-So-Greek Salad
PER SERVING: 357.4 CALORIES ~ 2.5 G PROTEIN ~ 7.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.1 G FIBER ~ 36.5 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 4.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 994.8 MG SODIUM
But Greek enough to make it a fine accompaniment to your Mediter-
ranean feast of kafta, hummus, and baba ghanoush.
Salads
189
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
160.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
3.9 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
55.1 mg
Niacin
2.1 mg
Iron
2.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
83.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
37.5 mg
Folate (total)
84.2 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
30.3 mg
Potassium
307.3 mg
For the dressing:
½ cup cold-pressed olive oil
½ cup fresh-squeezed lemon juice
4 cloves garlic, minced
1 teaspoon dried oregano
1 teaspoon black pepper
1 teaspoon salt
For the salad:
1 head romaine lettuce, chopped
1 cup thinly sliced cucumbers
½ cup kalamata olives, pitted and whole
¼ cup pine nuts


===PAGE 204===
Soups
Dr. Jason’s Savory Mushroom Soup . . . . . . . . . . . . .191
Winter Soup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .192
Clean-Out-the-Refrigerator Soup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
Cream of Carrot and Ginger Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .196
Dr. Fisel’s Squash Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .198
Nutty Onion Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .199
Quick Turkey Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .201
Raw Beet Soup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .202
Sweet Potato Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .203
Tangy Coconut Soup  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .204
10-Minute Avocado Soup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .206


===PAGE 205===
Sauté onions, celery, garlic, rosemary, sage, and thyme over medium
heat in a large soup pot until onions and celery are translucent.
Add carrots and mushrooms and sauté for another 3 minutes.
Add broth, miso paste, and bay leaves, reduce heat, and simmer for
20–30 minutes.
Taste, and add sea salt and pepper as desired.
Serves 6.
Healthy Tidbit
According to an article published in 2003 in the journal Life Science
that reviewed a study performed at the Chinese University of Hong
Kong, lentin, a protein found in shiitake mushrooms, acts as a strong
antifungal and has been shown to decrease the proliferation of leukemia
cells. It also revealed inhibitory action against HIV-reverse transcriptase,
which could prove effective in preventing HIV patients from developing
AIDS.
Dr. Jason’s Savory Mushroom Soup
PER SERVING: 191.6 CALORIES ~ 5.0 G PROTEIN ~ 27.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.7 G FIBER ~ 8.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 714.3 MG SODIUM
This recipe was developed by my husband, Jason Black, N.D. It affords
wonderful immune-boosting properties.
Soups
191
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,667.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.2 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
99.7 mg
Niacin
1.9 mg
Iron
2.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
360.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
30.4 mg
Folate (total)
33.6 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
11.5 mg
Potassium
703.7 mg
3 tablespoons olive oil
2 medium onions, chopped
4 celery stalks, chopped
6 garlic cloves, minced or pressed
1 tablespoon dried rosemary
1 tablespoon dried sage
1 tablespoon dried thyme
4 large carrots, chopped
2 cups sliced shiitake mushrooms
2 cups sliced crimini mushrooms 
7 cups organic chicken broth
3 tablespoons yellow miso paste
3 bay leaves
Sea salt to taste
Black pepper to taste


===PAGE 206===
In a large soup pot, sauté the squash, carrots, burdock, and turmeric
root in oil on medium-high heat for 5–10 minutes or until ingredients
are tender. If using tumeric powder instead of the root, wait to add it
until adding the other dry spices.
Add the onions, ginger, and garlic, and cook 5 minutes more. Pour
in the stock, and add the parsley, cayenne, curry, salt, lemon slices, and
kale; simmer on medium-low heat for 40 minutes.
Remove from heat, stir in miso, and let stand 5 minutes before gar-
nishing with green onions and serving.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
If you have some ingredi-
ents but lack others, make
substitutions. Use water or
organic chicken broth if
you don’t have vegetable
broth. Do, however, try to
include garlic, onions, and
burdock root, which are all
Winter Soup
PER SERVING: 262.5 CALORIES ~ 6.9 G PROTEIN ~ 39.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 7.8 G FIBER ~ 9.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1,600.6 MG SODIUM
This recipe was given to me by my friend and colleague Matt Fisel, N.D.
He could always be counted on to bring the most creative dishes to
potlucks.
192
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
3,124.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
1.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
145.4 mg
Niacin
2.4 mg
Iron
2.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
769.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
60.6 mg
Folate (total)
43.8 µg
Zinc
1.0 mg
Vitamin C
41.8 mg
Potassium
1,221.2 mg
½ medium butternut squash, peeled and
cubed
4 medium carrots, sliced
1/3 cup sliced burdock root, found in the
bulk herb section of most health-food
stores
¼ cup chopped turmeric root or ½
teaspoon turmeric powder, found in the
bulk herb section of most health-food
stores
2 tablespoons olive oil
½ medium onion, chopped
4 tablespoons grated fresh ginger
8 cloves garlic, chopped
8 cups vegetable stock
2 tablespoons fresh parsley, chopped
1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
1 teaspoon curry powder
Salt to taste
3 lemon slices
4 whole leaves of kale, roughly chopped
¼ cup miso paste
¼ cup sliced green onions (for garnish)


===PAGE 207===
Soups
193
healing vegetables that will strengthen your immune system through the
cold months.
Healthy Tidbit
Burdock root supports the liver, gallbladder, kidneys, and skin, and
helps to sooth mucous membranes. It can act as an alterative (any herb
or substance that improves lymphatic circulation, cleanses blood, boosts
immunity, and helps to gradually treat chronic conditions), is antibacter-
ial and antifungal, and can be used as a mild diuretic. Because of its bit-
ter properties, it can act as a great digestive stimulant. It is contraindi-
cated in pregnancy.


===PAGE 208===
Clean-Out-the-Refrigerator Soup
PER SERVING: 341.7 CALORIES ~ 26.6 G PROTEIN ~ 46.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 10.2 G FIBER ~ 5.7 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 36.3 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 742.0 MG SODIUM
This is the best way to get rid of those extra vegetables in your crisper
drawer. It is easy for soups to end up tasting the same. Following the
steps outlined here, you can make many different-tasting soups that are
always a hit. The recipe is very versatile because how it turns out really
depends on what you have in your refrigerator.
All of the ingredients listed below are optional; they are merely sug-
gestions to get you started.
For the broth:
6 cups organic chicken stock
1 onion, minced 
3 garlic cloves, minced or pressed
2 tablespoons garlic bean sauce (from Asian section of supermarket)
2 tablespoons miso soup paste
Herbs, spices, and sea salt to taste
Additional ingredients:
½ cup oats, ground in a coffee grinder or blender (for a thickener)
½ cup lentils, soaked overnight and water discarded
3 large carrots, sliced
3 celery stalks, sliced
1 large zucchini, sliced
10 shiitake mushrooms, sliced
1 medium sweet potato, cubed
2 cups leftover boneless, skinless chicken
The key to a good-tasting soup is to get the broth right before adding
vegetables and/or meat. Before turning on the stove, taste the broth cold
and adjust the seasonings.
Start by combining chicken
stock with onions and gar-
lic in a soup pot. 
Add herbs, spices, gar-
lic bean sauce, miso, or
anything else you desire.
When the taste meets your
satisfaction, turn the
194
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,588.8 RE
Vitamin D
2.5 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.5 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.5 mg
Calcium
71.6 mg
Niacin
9.2 mg
Iron
3.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.7 mg
Phosphorus
288.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
94.3 mg
Folate (total)
132.7 µg
Zinc
2.9 mg
Vitamin C
14.3 mg
Potassium
1,061.0 mg


===PAGE 209===
Soups
195
burner to medium high, bring the broth to a boil, then immediately
reduce heat and simmer for 15 minutes, covered. Keep tasting and
adding seasonings as desired.
For a thicker broth, you can add ground oats at this time. Also add
legumes. Don’t use too many of these ingredients, because they are
dense. Simmer, covered, for another 15 minutes.
Add vegetables, and simmer, covered, for another 15 minutes. Add
leftover meat and simmer, covered, for another 15–30 minutes.
After the vegetables have cooked to your satisfaction, turn off the
heat and allow the soup to sit covered for at least 15 minutes before
serving; this step allows the flavors to mingle. Serve plain or with rice
crackers.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
As I’ve said, you can and should try anything in this soup. Season the
broth with tamari instead of or in addition to garlic bean sauce. Add a
pinch of dried herbs such as thyme, marjoram, or Herbes de Provence.
Use ground quinoa as a thickener instead of oats. Use split peas, barley,
or navy beans instead of lentils. Use leftover meat of any kind, including
turkey or fish.
Healthy Tidbit
Celery is a great blood cleanser and helps to reduce blood pressure. It
helps to remove liver congestion and can ease constipation. It has been
used to treat rheumatism, gout, and arthritis. It is fairly dense with
water and contains very few calories; therefore, snack on it often.


===PAGE 210===
Cream of Carrot and Ginger Soup
PER SERVING: 289.9 CALORIES ~ 4.8 G PROTEIN ~ 25.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.2 G FIBER ~ 19.8 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 11.3 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 418.1 MG SODIUM
If you didn’t know, you wouldn’t guess that this soup contains no dairy.
It is so creamy that it can satisfy those urges you sometimes get when
dairy is not an option. This is a favorite for all ages.
2 pounds organic carrots
6 garlic cloves
2 medium yellow onions
2 tablespoons olive oil
2 cups organic chicken broth
11/3 cups coconut milk
1/3 cup soy milk
2 teaspoons grated fresh ginger
½ teaspoon sea salt
½ teaspoon pepper
2 tablespoons dried parsley (as garnish)
Steam the carrots until soft.
While the carrots are steaming, sauté the garlic and onions in the
olive oil until they are softened and slightly brown in color.
Combine steamed carrots, cooked garlic and onions, and all remain-
ing ingredients in a blender. Blend on the purée setting. (Caution: Don’t
heat the liquid ingredients before blending. Using a blender to mix large
quantities of hot liquids can cause a rapid expansion in the liquids,
which can create a small explosion! If you have to blend hot liquids in a
blender, do so in several small batches.)
Heat the blended soup in a large saucepan, and serve garnished with
dried parsley. Serves 6.
Substitutions
Rice milk or almond milk
can be used in place of the
soy milk. To reduce fat,
substitute soy milk, rice
milk, or water for the
coconut milk. To make a
thinner soup, add filtered
water.
196
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
4,319.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
1.8 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
83.6 mg
Niacin
2.1 mg
Iron
2.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
233.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
53.1 mg
Folate (total)
32.5 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
19.3 mg
Potassium
913.2 mg


===PAGE 211===
Soups
197
Healthy Tidbit
Carrots are high in the powerful antioxidants known as carotenoids,
which are a vitamin A precursor (that is, they form vitamin A once in
the body). Vitamin A is naturally antiviral. Carrots help to support the
lungs, liver, pancreas, and kidneys. They improve night vision, skin
health, and are anticarcinogenic.


===PAGE 212===
Dr. Fisel’s Squash Soup
PER SERVING: 172.1 CALORIES ~ 2.8 G PROTEIN ~ 32.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 5.2 G FIBER ~ 4.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 562.5 MG SODIUM
I remember many cold days when Matt Fisel, N.D., would aromatize the
medical school lounge with his scrumptious-smelling squash soup. We all
would stand in line for a sample.
1 medium onion, chopped
1 tablespoon olive oil
2 cups vegetable stock 
2 cups butternut squash (seeds removed), peeled and diced
2 cups sweet potatoes or yams, peeled and diced
1 apple, cored and diced
1 teaspoon freshly grated ginger
½ teaspoon nutmeg
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon pepper
¼ teaspoon cayenne pepper
In a large soup pot, sauté the onions in oil on medium-high heat until
translucent.
Add all other ingredients and bring to a boil.
Turn down heat and simmer for 30 minutes.
Remove 2 ladles of vegetables and 1 ladle of stock; purée them
together in a blender or food processor until smooth. Return to soup
pot; stir soup before serving.
Serves 4.
Healthy Tidbit
Nutmeg is a seed from a fragrant evergreen. The seeds can be roasted,
ground, and applied to wounds. Crushed seeds yield a beneficial insecti-
cide. The root can be
chewed to relieve a
toothache.
198
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,935.7 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.5 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
77.5 mg
Niacin
1.5 mg
Iron
1.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
235.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
47.8 mg
Folate (total)
27.4 µg
Zinc
0.4 mg
Vitamin C
20.8 mg
Potassium
700.4 mg


===PAGE 213===
Nutty Onion Soup
PER SERVING: 543.1 CALORIES ~ 12.5 G PROTEIN ~ 33.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 4.4 G FIBER ~ 43.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 7.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 475.1 MG SODIUM
This recipe was inspired by another of my favorite cookbooks, Jane
Kinderlehrer’s Confessions of a Sneaky Organic Cook. My daughter
chows down on this soup each time I make it. Notice that it has no
added salt and really doesn’t need any.
1 quart of organic chicken broth
1½ cups filtered water
2 cups cashews
2 small onions, chopped
3 tablespoons cold-pressed, extra-virgin olive oil
2 teaspoons marjoram
2 teaspoons thyme
1 tablespoon chives, minced (for garnish)
Grind the nuts in a coffee grinder until very fine.
In a large skillet, sauté the onions in oil on medium-high heat until
translucent. Remove from heat and allow to cool slightly.
Transfer the nuts and onions to a blender with remaining ingredients
and blend until smooth.
Transfer to a soup pot and simmer on medium heat for 20–30 min-
utes. Serve warm, garnished with minced chives.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
I love almonds in this soup as well. Experiment with different types of
nuts. If you desire a smoother soup, buy nuts without outer coatings like
whole almonds have, such as cashews or slivered almonds. If you want a
smooth almond soup, soak the almonds overnight, and remove the peel
by rubbing them through your fingers in the morning. When using
soaked almonds you may
need less water; you will
have to blend the soaked
almonds instead of grinding
them in the coffee grinder.
Soups
199
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
127.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
1.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
88.7 mg
Niacin
1.7 mg
Iron
5.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
610.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
189.6 mg
Folate (total)
50.2 µg
Zinc
4.0 mg
Vitamin C
6.0 mg
Potassium
773.4 mg


===PAGE 214===
200
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Healthy Tidbit
The herb marjoram is related to oregano, but is generally milder. Marjo-
ram stems can be laid across charcoal in the barbecue grill to add a faint
flavor to food. The flowers will attract bees and butterflies to your gar-
den, and the seed heads will provide food to birds in the winter.


===PAGE 215===
Heat ¼ cup broth in a large saucepan over medium heat.
Add onion and carrots. Sauté until carrots begin to soften, about 5
minutes. Add garlic and sauté for an additional minute.
Add remaining broth, water, miso paste, turkey, and rice. Simmer
for 20 minutes. Sprinkle with parsley before serving.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
If you have extra vegetables in your refrigerator that need to be cooked,
add them to this soup; that way, it becomes something different every
time you make it. If you can tolerate tomatoes, they would be a great
addition to this recipe.
Healthy Tidbit
Always try to eat in a relaxed atmosphere as opposed to in the car, on
the run, or while talking on the phone. Stressful situations and stress in
general stimulate the sympathetic nervous system and downregulate the
parasympathetic nervous system. The parasympathetic system is respon-
sible for digestion; if it is downregulated while you are eating, you will
fail to digest your food
properly. So remember to
“rest and digest.”
Quick Turkey Soup
PER SERVING: 121.0 CALORIES ~ 14.1 G PROTEIN ~ 13.0 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.7 G FIBER ~ 1.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 31.4 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 774.9 MG SODIUM
I found this recipe on the Internet and only had to change a few ingredi-
ents to make it suitable for the anti-inflammation diet. Don’t be afraid to
experiment with it.
Soups
201
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
528.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
29.5 mg
Niacin
4.3 mg
Iron
1.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
151.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.4 µg
Magnesium
34.9 mg
Folate (total)
11.4 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
5.8 mg
Potassium
278.8 mg
6½ cups nonfat organic chicken broth
1½ cups of water
1 cup diced onion
1 cup diced carrots
1 clove garlic, minced
2 tablespoons miso paste
2–3 cups cooked turkey, cubed
1 cup cooked brown rice
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley


===PAGE 216===
Raw Beet Soup
PER SERVING: 237.8 CALORIES ~ 4.5 G PROTEIN ~ 30.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 8.4 G FIBER ~ 12.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.8 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 168.0 MG SODIUM
This recipe comes from the marvelous cook Erika Siegel, N.D., L.Ac.
3 medium organic beets (enough to obtain 1 cup juice)
1 pound organic carrots (enough to obtain 1 cup juice)
¼ cup chopped green onion
½ cup shredded green cabbage
1 teaspoon chopped dill
½ cup finely grated beets
1 large avocado, spooned into chunks
½ apple, thinly sliced
Put beets and carrots through juicer to yield one cup of each. (You can
buy fresh juice at a health-food store or juice bar if you do not have a
juicer.)
Place all ingredients except avocado, grated beets, and apple into the
blender, and blend until smooth.
Chill until ready to serve. Serve cold garnished with avocados, beets,
and apple.
Serves 2.
Healthy Tidbit
Dill aids digestion, reduces flatus, reduces hiccups, eases stomach pain,
and can help with insomnia. I like to use dill to flavor fish, especially
salmon.
202
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,812.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.2 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.2 mg
Calcium
55.1 mg
Niacin
3.2 mg
Iron
1.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.3 mg
Phosphorus
70.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
39.4 mg
Folate (total)
103.0 µg
Zinc
0.8 mg
Vitamin C
21.0 mg
Potassium
897.6 mg


===PAGE 217===
Steam the yams or sweet potatoes until they are soft. This can take up to
40 minutes. Sauté the garlic and onions in olive oil until the onions are
soft and translucent; set aside until potatoes are finished.
Once the potatoes are cooked, allow them to cool slightly. Place all
ingredients except the milk substitute in the blender, and blend.
Gradually add the milk substitute until soup has reached desired
consistency. Serve immediately while still warm.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Using water instead of milk substitute won’t make much difference in
taste in this recipe.
Healthy Tidbit
The yam was first cultivated in Africa more than ten thousand years
ago. Yams can be used to treat arthritis, asthma, and spasms. Their
natural plant estrogens may help various female complaints. They help
to bind heavy metals in the
body, thereby assisting in
detoxification of tissues.
Sweet Potato Soup
PER SERVING: 125.0 CALORIES ~ 2.8 G PROTEIN ~ 20.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.1 G FIBER ~ 4.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.5 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 336.6 MG SODIUM
When I took this soup to a party everyone raved about it. I bet your
friends and family will rave about it, too. This is a great soup to make
ahead of time and freeze in portion sizes for later use.
Soups
203
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
1,364.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.5 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
70.7 mg
Niacin
0.7 mg
Iron
1.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.2 mg
Phosphorus
161.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
22.9 mg
Folate (total)
8.5 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
5.7 mg
Potassium
411.8 mg
2 large or 3 small sweet potatoes or
yams, cut into chunks (I like to use yams)
1 onion, diced
5 garlic cloves, minced
1 tablespoon organic cold-pressed olive
oil
15-ounce can organic chicken broth
¼ cup milk substitute such as rice milk,
or water
1 teaspoon wheat-free tamari
½ teaspoon grated fresh ginger 
1 teaspoon thyme (or more if you desire)
Sea salt and pepper to taste


===PAGE 218===
Tangy Coconut Soup
PER SERVING: 323.0 CALORIES ~ 40.7 G PROTEIN ~ 14.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.8 G FIBER ~ 11.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 4.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 98.7 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 367.4 MG SODIUM
I love tom kha soup, but I know that the versions served at most Thai
restaurants contain sugar. This recipe allows you to experience a similar
taste without added sugar. Galanga root and lemongrass can be pur-
chased at Asian markets and at some well-stocked gourmet groceries.
2 chicken breasts, cubed (about 1½ pounds meat)
½ red onion, sliced into very thin rings
2 teaspoons olive oil
Galanga root (optional)
3 stalks of lemongrass, cut into large chunks (for flavor, not to be eaten)
1 hot chili, minced and seeded, or 2 generous dashes of dried cayenne
pepper
10 small mushrooms, sliced thin
1 cup filtered water
Juice of ½ medium lemon
2 teaspoons fish sauce
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon honey
1 13.5-ounce can light coconut milk
In a medium saucepan, sauté the red onion and chicken until onions
begin to soften.
Add all remaining ingredients except the coconut milk. Stir to com-
bine. Simmer for 15 minutes.
Add coconut milk and simmer for another 15 minutes or until vege-
tables and chicken are finished cooking. Do not boil the coconut milk or
it will separate.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Adding kaffir lime leaves
will increase the tangy 
flavor.
Healthy Tidbit
These days it seems that all
foods contain sugar. Even
many Thai restaurants—
and other restaurants for
204
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
132.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.9 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.6 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.4 mg
Calcium
18.1 mg
Niacin
21.2 mg
Iron
1.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
1.1 mg
Phosphorus
60.4 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.7 µg
Magnesium
58.8 mg
Folate (total)
16.5 µg
Zinc
1.5 mg
Vitamin C
37.6 mg
Potassium
745.0 mg


===PAGE 219===
Soups
205
that matter—add sugar to many of their dishes. Sugar consumption in
the United States has reached what I consider to be a pathological level.
Soft drink consumption has risen 500 percent in the past fifty years.
Half of all Americans drink soft drinks daily. Sugar has many ill effects
on the body, one of which is to increase insulin levels, which ultimately
leads to energy conservation and fat production, hence promoting
weight gain.


===PAGE 220===
10-Minute Avocado Soup
PER SERVING: 797.5 CALORIES ~ 26.7 G PROTEIN ~ 30.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 17.6 G FIBER ~ 69.9
G TOTAL FAT ~ 6.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 329.1 MG SODIUM
This soup is easy to make, tastes great, and fills the stomach on a cool
night.
2 medium ripe avocados
2 cups almond milk
½ teaspoon cumin
½ teaspoon ground ginger
½ teaspoon salt
1 clove garlic, minced
Mash avocados in a pan.
Add all remaining ingredients. Stir well until mixed fully. You may
use an electric beater or blender for this step.
When the soup is well mixed, heat just enough to serve.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
Use any seasonings you desire to make this soup your own creation.
Healthy Tidbit
Nearly all of the calories from avocados come from fat, primarily
monounsaturated fat. Because the fat they contain is a healthful kind,
avocados are a great food for individuals wishing to gain weight. They
help to nourish and build the blood and yin. Because of avocados’ but-
tery texture, they can replace butter as a spread and can complement
many different dishes.
206
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
53.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.3 mg
Vitamin E
1.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.7 mg
Calcium
259.2 mg
Niacin
5.6 mg
Iron
4.7 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.4 mg
Phosphorus
589.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
336.7 mg
Folate (total)
83.4 µg
Zinc
4.1 mg
Vitamin C
8.7 mg
Potassium
1,200.4 mg


===PAGE 221===
Sweet Things
Baked Red Apples  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .208
Blueberry Upside-Down Cake  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .209
Carrot Raisin Cookies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .211
Chunky Applesauce  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .213
Coconut Vanilla “Ice Cream”  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .214
Frozen Bananas  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .215
Ginger Snaps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .216
Ginger Spice Cookies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .217
Hearty Healthy Cookies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .218
Mochi with Yogurt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .219
No-Bake Oatmeal Cookies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .220
Quick Sherbet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .221
Sandy’s Almond Butter Cookies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .222
Sun Candies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .223
Tahini–Almond Butter Cookies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .224


===PAGE 222===
Preheat oven to 375° F.
Core apple. Peel skin off top third of apple and place in individual
baking dish. Drizzle maple syrup, cinnamon, and raisins over apple.
Squeeze a little lemon juice on top and add 1 teaspoon of water.
Bake uncovered for about 1 hour, and serve warm. Serves 1.
Substitutions
You could easily use pears instead of apples and reduce the cooking
time to 40 minutes.
Healthy Tidbit
This dessert works well for Thanksgiving or other holiday dinners, when
we often eat more food than typical. And what do we do after dinner?
We often sit sluggishly, watching TV. Television has played a major role
in promoting inactive lifestyles. Results of a study conducted by Fung et
al. and published in the American Journal of Epidemiology in 2000
indicated that the average number of hours of television watched in
1994 was significantly positively associated with obesity and LDL cho-
lesterol levels (the bad cholesterol) and significantly inversely propor-
tional to HDL cholesterol
levels (the good choles-
terol). After your holiday
feast, encourage your fam-
ily to join you on a brisk
walk instead of plopping
down in front of the foot-
ball game.
Baked Red Apples
PER SERVING: 104.3 CALORIES ~ 0.5 G PROTEIN ~ 27.5 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.5 G FIBER ~ 0.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 2.5 MG SODIUM
This recipe, another one from Erika Siegel, N.D., L.Ac., is a delectable
after-dinner treat. Slide the apples into the oven as you sit down to your
meal, and dessert will be warm when you finish dining. They also taste
great the next day cold.
208
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
7.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
15.2 mg
Niacin
0.1 mg
Iron
0.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
20.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
9.5 mg
Folate (total)
4.4 µg
Zinc
0.3 mg
Vitamin C
6.5 mg
Potassium
199.8 mg
1 apple, Fuji, Braeburn, Gala, or personal
favorite
1 teaspoon maple syrup
Dash of cinnamon
10 raisins
Fresh lemon juice to taste
1 teaspoon filtered water


===PAGE 223===
Blueberry Upside-Down Cake
PER SERVING: 253.7 CALORIES ~ 3.8 G PROTEIN ~ 34.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.0 G FIBER ~ 11.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 35.3 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 121.0 MG SODIUM
This is a fun party pleaser with a wonderful presentation. Who ever
knew that a treat this decadent could enhance your health? But remem-
ber, even healthy sweets should be eaten sparingly.
4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1/3 cup plus 3 tablespoons organic brown rice syrup
1½ cup fresh organic blueberries
Sea salt to taste
1 cup spelt flour
1 teaspoon baking powder
¼ cup rice milk or soy milk
1 organic egg, beaten
Preheat oven to 350° F.
Warm 1 tablespoon oil with 2 tablespoons rice syrup over low heat
until syrup is runny and easy to spread. Then spoon the mixture evenly
over the bottom of a greased 1-quart soufflé dish.
Sprinkle the blueberries into the soufflé dish; add a sprinkle of sea
salt and set aside.
Mix together remaining ingredients (including remaining oil and
syrup) until you have a smooth batter. Carefully spoon the batter over
the blueberries, making sure not to disturb them.
Bake about 40–45 minutes, or until center of cake springs back
when touched gently. Remove from oven, run a sharp knife around the
rim of the soufflé pan, and invert immediately onto a serving plate. Any
blueberry mixture that might stick to the pan can be spooned onto the
cake after it is plated. Serve warm.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
You can try different flours
with this recipe. When
using a gluten-free flour,
remember to add a binder
such as ½ banana, ground
flaxseeds, or arrowroot
powder.
Sweet Things
209
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
19.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.1 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
1.5 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
57.0 mg
Niacin
1.2 mg
Iron
1.1 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
40.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
4.7 mg
Folate (total)
7.3 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
4.8 mg
Potassium
147.3 mg


===PAGE 224===
210
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Healthy Tidbit
Blueberries are a rich source of vitamin C and important bioflavanoids
called proanthocyanidins, both of which are powerful antioxidants,
meaning they protect the body from damaging, carcinogenic free radi-
cals. Research conducted at Tufts University in 1996 rated blueberries
number one in antioxidant activity among forty antioxidant-containing
fruits and vegetables. This same research showed blueberries to diminish
the effects of aging and improve memory.


===PAGE 225===
Carrot Raisin Cookies
PER SERVING: 76.4 CALORIES ~ 1.4 G PROTEIN ~ 11.8 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.0 G FIBER ~ 2.9 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 2.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 6.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 27.6 MG SODIUM
I modified this recipe from The Complete Food Allergy Cookbook, by
Marilyn Gioannini, M.D. Children like these cookies and at the same
time get their daily dose of beta-carotene. Using a combination of flours
and sweeteners makes these little treats even richer.
1½ cup spelt flour
1 cup oat flour
3 teaspoons aluminum-free baking powder
2 teaspoons cinnamon
2 teaspoons ground ginger
2/3 cup raisins (omit if you are diabetic)
½ cup chopped nuts (optional)
6 tablespoons coconut oil, warmed to a liquid consistency
3 tablespoons milk substitute (rice milk, soy milk, etc.)
1½ cup grated carrots
¼ cup raw honey (you may add 1 more tablespoon for a sweeter cookie)
¼ cup brown rice syrup (you may add 1 more tablespoon for a 
sweeter cookie)
1 organic egg
Dash of salt
Preheat oven to 350° F. Mix together all dry ingredients, raisins, and
nuts.
In a large bowl, mix all wet ingredients together, including carrots;
gradually add the dry ingredients, making sure the raisins and carrots
don’t clump together. For easier mixing, you can gently heat the honey
and brown rice syrup before adding them.
Drop with a spoon onto a greased baking sheet; bake for about 8
minutes.
Makes about 35–40
cookies.
Substitutions
You could add many differ-
ent goodies to this recipe.
How about some coconut,
mixed nuts (except
Sweet Things
211
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
135.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
14.4 mg
Niacin
0.3 mg
Iron
0.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
22.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
6.8 mg
Folate (total)
2.7 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
0.6 mg
Potassium
77.6 mg


===PAGE 226===
212
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
peanuts), seeds, or a small amount of cut fruit? If you want to use a dif-
ferent flour, you could substitute quinoa or amaranth flour in place of
the spelt flour. Remember to add 1/8–¼ cup of arrowroot powder or
other binder.
Healthy Tidbit
Ginger has a long history of medicinal use in China and Japan. It has
been used for treating simple nausea, other stomach complaints, colds,
and headaches. Ginger is a very warming herb and can be helpful to
someone who has a chilly constitution. Its anti-inflammatory properties
make it helpful for rheumatic complaints.


===PAGE 227===
Chunky Applesauce
PER SERVING: 76.4 CALORIES ~ 0.4 G PROTEIN ~ 20.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.7 G FIBER ~ 0.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 1.8 MG SODIUM
My grandmother used to make homemade applesauce for us, and it was
my favorite.
8 fresh apples, peeled and cut into chunks (I prefer fujis because of their
sweetness)
2 tablespoons cinnamon
½ teaspoon nutmeg or to taste
1 tablespoon pure maple syrup (optional)
Place peeled, cut apples in a large saucepan with a lid. Add just enough
filtered water to cover the bottom of the pan. Cover and simmer on
medium heat for 5 minutes. Make sure the water does not evaporate,
and if you need to add more, do so sparingly.
Add cinnamon and nutmeg. Continue cooking, stirring often, until
apples are mushy, yet still have chunks, and the applesauce is to your
desired consistency.
Taste while warm; add maple syrup if you desire more sweetness.
With good apples, you shouldn’t have to add the maple syrup.
Serves 8.
Substitutions
You could add some pears or peaches for a different flavor. For holiday
dinners you could add a small amount of beets or beet juice to make a
nice pink applesauce.
Healthy Tidbit
Apples have acids that inhibit fermentation in the stomach; therefore
they are easier to digest than many other fruits. Apples can quench thirst,
and they can clean your teeth if eaten after a meal. Green apples stimu-
late liver function and may
help to soften gallstones.
The pectin from apples
helps to promote growth of
healthy intestinal bacteria,
thereby aiding in gastro-
intestinal defense and 
supporting healthy colon
function.
Sweet Things
213
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
7.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
29.2 mg
Niacin
0.1 mg
Iron
0.8 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
16.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
7.9 mg
Folate (total)
4.7 µg
Zinc
0.1 mg
Vitamin C
6.8 mg
Potassium
156.3 mg


===PAGE 228===
Coconut Vanilla “Ice Cream”
PER SERVING: 201.4 CALORIES ~ 2.8 G PROTEIN ~ 17.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.7 G FIBER ~ 14.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 12.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 35.1 MG SODIUM
This recipe requires an ice cream maker.
1 13.5-ounce can coconut milk
1¼ cup vanilla soy milk
¼ cup honey
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
Combine all ingredients in a medium-sized bowl; mix well until honey is
dissolved.
Turn ice cream maker on and pour mixture in.
Let ice cream maker operate for 30 minutes. Serve immediately.
Serves 6.
Substitutions
For even more flavor, add fruit or toasted coconut.
Healthy Tidbit
Chronic ear infections are commonly related to dairy allergy. Resolving
chronic ear infections is often as simple as eliminating dairy from the
child’s diet. It was discovered as early as 1976 by Leonard Draper,
M.D., that allergies as well as infection and mechanical blockage are
important in the etiology of otolaryngology disorders.
214
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
31.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.5 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
75.1 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
2.5 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
114.0 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
42.4 mg
Folate (total)
8.9 µg
Zinc
0.4 mg
Vitamin C
0.7 mg
Potassium
204.9 mg


===PAGE 229===
Frozen Bananas
PER SERVING: 200.7 CALORIES ~ 2.2 G PROTEIN ~ 38.6 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 7.4 G FIBER ~ 7.1 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 6.1 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 7.6 MG SODIUM
These are the perfect summer treat. Make many at once and keep them
in the freezer for you or your children whenever a sweet craving strikes.
If you have something healthy on hand, you are much less likely to binge
on food that is not good for you.
1 ripe banana, cut into thirds
1 tablespoon carob powder
¼ teaspoon water
½ teaspoon honey
¼ cup unsweetened coconut, ground medium
In a small saucepan over medium-low heat, combine carob powder and
enough water to make a paste. Add honey, and heat to desired consis-
tency. Make sure it is not too runny.
Coat each piece of banana in carob mixture and roll in coconut.
Wrap individually and place in the freezer until completely frozen (at
least 30 minutes).
Take them out of the freezer 20 minutes before serving.
Serves 1.
Substitutions
These are a delicious, healthful alternative to chocolate, ice cream, or
popsicles. Experiment with rolling them in different kinds of ground nuts
or seeds.
Healthy Tidbit
Carob is alkaline in nature, nourishes the lungs, and is a great source of
calcium. It also contains potassium, vitamin A, and vitamin B-complex.
It contains 8 percent protein and has less fat and fewer calories than
chocolate. It is free of caf-
feine, unlike chocolate, and
is naturally sweet.
Sweet Things
215
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
9.5 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
31.2 mg
Niacin
1.0 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.5 mg
Phosphorus
53.8 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
41.8 mg
Folate (total)
30.7 µg
Zinc
0.5 mg
Vitamin C
11.0 mg
Potassium
548.4 mg


===PAGE 230===
Ginger Snaps
PER SERVING: 201.4 CALORIES ~ 1.7 G PROTEIN ~ 29.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.7 G FIBER ~ 9.2 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 7.7 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 248.7 MG SODIUM
Ginger snaps have been a favorite of mine since I was a little girl. This is
a recipe from my friend and colleague Matt Fisel, N.D.
1½ cup tapioca flour
1 cup rye flour
½ teaspoon guar gum
1 teaspoon baking powder
1 teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon salt
¼ cup maple syrup
¼ cup brown rice syrup
½ cup coconut oil, warmed to a liquid consistency
5 tablespoons grated fresh ginger
Preheat oven to 350° F.
In a large bowl, stir together the flours, guar gum, baking powder,
baking soda, and salt. Add the maple syrup, brown rice syrup, oil, and
ginger. Stir together gently until just mixed.
Scoop spoon-sized portions onto a lightly greased cookie sheet and
bake for 12–15 minutes.
Makes about 12 cookies.
Substitutions
You can add raisins to this recipe.
Healthy Tidbit
Brown rice syrup is a very versatile sweetener. It is nearly as sweet as
honey and about twice as sweet as sugar; therefore, when you use it in
baking, you need to use only half the quantity that you would use of
white sugar. After a while,
you’ll come to know and
love the sweeteners that are
allowed on the anti-inflam-
mation diet, and you won’t
even remember missing
white sugar.
216
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
37.7 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
83.1 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
28.8 mg
Folate (total)
6.7 µg
Zinc
0.9 mg
Vitamin C
0.2 mg
Potassium
107.4 mg


===PAGE 231===
Preheat oven to 375° F.
Sift together the first 8 ingredients and set aside.
Mix the oil, syrup, honey, and egg with an electric mixer on the
lowest speed until well blended. With the mixer set on low speed, gradu-
ally add the dry ingredients to the wet; mix well.
Using a spatula, fold in the oats one cup at a time until incorpo-
rated. Drop dough by tablespoons onto an oiled baking sheet.
Bake for 8–10 minutes.
Makes about 16 cookies.
Substitutions
You might try different flours if rice and rye are not available.
Healthy Tidbit
Rye’s health benefits mimic its heartiness as a crop. Rye helps to build
muscles, promote energy, and support hepatic (liver) function. Nutri-
tionally, rye is similar to wheat, but it contains significantly less gluten.
Rye contains B vitamins,
vitamin E, protein, and
iron. Because of its gluten
content, rye should be care-
fully rotated in the diet.
Ginger Spice Cookies
PER SERVING: 183.0 CALORIES ~ 3.3 G PROTEIN ~ 25.7 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.7 G FIBER ~ 8.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 6.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 13.2 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 150.7 MG SODIUM
These yummy treats have a cake-like consistency and texture. The recipe
comes from Cyndi Stuart of Sheridan, Oregon.
Sweet Things
217
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
11.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
28.8 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
1.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
109.7 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
48.6 mg
Folate (total)
10.5 µg
Zinc
1.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
114.2 mg
1 cup brown rice flour
1 cup rye flour
¼ teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon ground cloves (more if you
like a strong clove flavor)
1 teaspoon ground ginger
1 teaspoon cinnamon
½ cup coconut oil, warmed to a liquid
consistency
¼ cup real maple syrup
¼ cup raw honey
1 organic egg
2 cups old-fashioned oats


===PAGE 232===
Preheat oven to 375° F.
Mix together wet ingredients, including softened butter, in a large
bowl. In a separate, smaller bowl, mix together flour, baking soda, cin-
namon, and sea salt. Slowly add dry ingredients to wet ingredients, stir-
ring constantly, until you have a smooth batter. Add oats, nuts, seeds,
and apple, stirring gently until mixture is uniform. Drop with a spoon
onto a greased cookie sheet, and bake for 9–12 minutes.
Makes 25–30 cookies.
Substitutions
If you cannot tolerate any dairy, coconut oil can be used instead of but-
ter with no change in flavor. Any nuts or seeds and many fruits can be
used, so don’t be afraid to experiment. Add grated zucchini to moisten
and add flavor to these cookies.
Healthy Tidbit
According to a randomized study published in the December 2004 issue
of Diabetes Care, adding walnuts to a low-fat diet improves lipid pro-
files for patients with type-
II diabetes. Walnuts are
distinguished from other
nuts by their higher polyun-
saturated fat content (and,
importantly, their alpha-
linolenic acid [ALA] con-
tent) combined with their
high antioxidant content.
Hearty Healthy Cookies
PER SERVING: 186.8 CALORIES ~ 3.1 G PROTEIN ~ 19.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.9 G FIBER ~ 11.5 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 6.4 G SATURATED FAT ~ 18.2 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 175.1 MG SODIUM
These cookies were my first experiment with anti-inflammatory baking.
They have a great flavor and a lot of fiber.
218
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
26.8 RE
Vitamin D
0.1 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
16.1 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
84.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
18.6 mg
Folate (total)
9.1 µg
Zinc
0.4 mg
Vitamin C
0.2 mg
Potassium
84.5 mg
1 organic egg, beaten
¼ cup rice milk
½ cup organic butter (1 stick), softened
½ cup coconut oil, warmed to a liquid
consistency
½ cup pure honey
1 teaspoon vanilla extract
1½ cups oat flour
1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 teaspoon sea salt
3 cups rolled oats
½ cup walnut pieces
¼ cup sunflower seeds
½ cup minced, peeled apple


===PAGE 233===
Preheat oven to 350° F.
Cut mochi patty into 12 pieces and arrange on lightly greased bak-
ing pan. Bake until they begin to puff up and fill with air, about 12–16
minutes. Remove from oven. Top with yogurt and blueberries, and driz-
zle with maple syrup. Serve immediately.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
You can use any fruit instead of blueberries. I sometimes stuff the bite-
sized mochi pieces with raisins or figs before baking, and then top with
yogurt and syrup.
Healthy Tidbit
Japanese women are only one-third as likely to get breast cancer as
American women. Genetics really can’t account for the difference
because when Japanese women migrate to the United States, their risk
for breast cancer increases. So what is the difference between these two
populations? Along with many health experts, I believe it is diet and
lifestyle. Many American foods are low in quality and include artificial
additives and fillers; the typical American diet consists of large amounts
of refined and processed foods. As processed foods and fast foods have
become more available in Japan, breast cancer rates there have increased
(Japanese women used to have only one-fifth the risk of American
women for developing the
disease). Researchers have
found that diets lower in
total fat and lifestyles that
include moderate exercise
are protective against
breast cancer.
Mochi with Yogurt
PER SERVING: 367.6 CALORIES ~ 5.9 G PROTEIN ~ 82.4 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 3.3 G FIBER ~ 1.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.2 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 23.8 MG SODIUM
This is a simple-to-make, not-too-sweet dessert. Mochi, originally a
Japanese food, is pressed brown rice.
Sweet Things
219
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
3.6 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.4 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
107.7 mg
Niacin
0.8 mg
Iron
1.0 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
22.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
17.9 mg
Folate (total)
4.1 µg
Zinc
2.5 mg
Vitamin C
4.7 mg
Potassium
133.0 mg
1 12.5-ounce package mochi (can be
found in the refrigerated section of a
health-food store)
1 cup plain soy yogurt
1 cup blueberries
½ cup pure maple syrup


===PAGE 234===
No-Bake Oatmeal Cookies
PER SERVING: 181.1 CALORIES ~ 5.0 G PROTEIN ~ 25.1 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.8 G FIBER ~ 7.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.8 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 53.3 MG SODIUM
I love to munch on these cookies, but I do so sparingly. They are good
for special occasions. It is better to eat these than to binge on white
flour, white sugar, or processed baked goods.
½ cup honey
½ cup brown rice syrup
3 cups oats
3 teaspoons carob powder
2 teaspoons vanilla extract
¼ cup melted organic butter (optional)
1 cup organic almond butter
Mix all ingredients together, form into cookie shapes, arrange them on
wax paper, and place in refrigerator to cool. Once cookies have cooled,
you can store them in an airtight container in the refrigerator.
Makes about 24 cookies.
Substitutions
You can use 1 cup honey or 1 cup brown rice syrup if you only have one
or the other. You can add many different goodies to this recipe. How
about some coconut, mixed nuts (except peanuts), seeds, a small amount
of cut fruit, or anything else you desire. If you are worried about calo-
ries, omit the butter.
Healthy Tidbit
Spending time in the kitchen may be new to you or it may be a favorite
pastime, but whatever the case, try to enjoy the experience. Instead of
dreading having to cook and prepare meals, reflect on the nature of the
food you are eating and use this time as a stress reliever. If you learn to
relax in the kitchen, your
cooking will improve, you
will digest your food prop-
erly, and you will find relief
from stress (which should
be a daily practice). Stress
relief is important for over-
all health, so most of all,
have fun.
220
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.0 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.2 mg
Vitamin E
0.9 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
40.9 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
1.4 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
157.5 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
66.7 mg
Folate (total)
18.0 µg
Zinc
1.1 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
173.7 mg


===PAGE 235===
Quick Sherbet
PER SERVING: 46.1 CALORIES ~ 0.9 G PROTEIN ~ 11.2 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.7 G FIBER ~ 0.3 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 7.5 MG SODIUM
My husband and I were craving dessert one night, and all we had were
some blackberries that I’d recently picked and frozen. I thought I’d blend
them into a sherbet, and it worked! The benefits of experimenting come
through again. The recipe may seem similar to a smoothie, but it really
does come out like sherbet.
2 cups frozen organic strawberries (you can use almost any fruit, but
berries work best)
¼ cup rice milk
2 tablespoons honey (optional)
Mint sprig (optional)
Put the frozen fruit in the blender and add the rice milk. Use just enough
rice milk to get your blender going. If necessary, use a little bit more or
less.
Add sweetener if desired, and blend until the the mixture reaches a
smooth, sherbetlike consistency.
Garnish with a mint sprig and serve immediately.
Serves 4.
Substitutions
This simple recipe can work with many different fruits. You can use
brown rice syrup or maple syrup instead of honey. Get creative when
serving. You can hollow out a lemon and spoon the sherbet into the rind
to serve it.
Healthy Tidbit
Mint, or mentha, has many uses. It is cooling, relieves abdominal pres-
sure after a meal, and can defend against pathogens. Mint’s aromatic
quality invigorates the system by increasing circulation of blood, lymph,
and energy. Mint is a great
herb with which to garnish
summer dishes and desserts
since it cools and calms the
temperament.
Sweet Things
221
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
4.4 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.3 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.0 mg
Calcium
20.2 mg
Niacin
0.5 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
20.6 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
14.6 mg
Folate (total)
20.2 µg
Zinc
0.2 mg
Vitamin C
45.5 mg
Potassium
180.3 mg


===PAGE 236===
Preheat oven to 375° F.
Mix all dry ingredients together.
In a large bowl, mix butter, almond butter, honey, and egg; gradu-
ally add the dry ingredients. For easier mixing, you can gently heat the
honey and butter before adding them to the mixture.
Drop with a spoon onto a greased baking sheet; bake for 9–12 min-
utes. Makes about 12 cookies.
Substitutions
These cookies taste just like peanut butter cookies. The tapioca flour
adds a lightness to the batter. If you wish, you can use ¼ cup organic
butter plus ¼ cup warmed coconut oil in place of the ½ cup butter.
Healthy Tidbit
Almond butter is a healthy source of protein. The recommended daily
allowance for protein is as follows: A healthy male adult should con-
sume 60 grams, a healthy female adult should consume 46 grams, and a
child should consume anywhere from 16 grams to 28 grams depending
on his or her weight and age. One cup of almonds contains 27 grams of
protein, a chicken breast
contains 30–40 grams, a
can of tuna contains 24
grams, 3 ounces of salmon
contains 21 grams, and 1
cup of refried beans con-
tains 21 grams.
Sandy’s Almond Butter Cookies
PER SERVING: 235.3 CALORIES ~ 2.6 G PROTEIN ~ 25.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 0.7 G FIBER ~ 14.4 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 5.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 38.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 255.7 MG SODIUM
I have obtained many ideas about wheat-free cooking from my mother,
Sandy Stock of Dubuque, Iowa, who has learned to survive with a wheat
allergy in a wheat-inundated world.
222
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
55.3 RE
Vitamin D
0.2 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.0 mg
Vitamin E
0.9 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
46.9 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
0.6 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
72.9 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.1 µg
Magnesium
32.9 mg
Folate (total)
9.4 µg
Zinc
0.4 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
95.5 mg
¾ cup tapioca flour
½ cup rice flour
¾ teaspoon baking soda
½ teaspoon baking powder
¼ teaspoon salt
½ cup organic butter, softened
½ cup almond butter
½ cup honey
1 organic egg


===PAGE 237===
Sun Candies
PER SERVING: 115.2 CALORIES ~ 4.3 G PROTEIN ~ 4.9 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 2.0 G FIBER ~ 9.6 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 1.0 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 5.9 MG SODIUM
Another name for these might be “esssential fatty acid candies” because
they’re chock-full of the stuff.
2½ cups sunflower seeds, ground in small batches in the coffee grinder
1½ tablespoons almond butter
1½ tablespoons raw honey
½ teaspoon vanilla extract
Mix together 2 cups ground sunflower seeds plus all remaining ingredi-
ents. Form into balls.
Roll balls in remaining ½ cup ground sunflower seeds to coat. Serve
immediately; store in refrigerator.
Makes about 20 candies.
Substitutions
I like to roll the candies in coconut and/or carob power or add these
ingredients to the recipe. You may need to increase quantities of almond
butter or honey to get the balls to roll after adding coconut or carob
powder.
Healthy Tidbit
One cup of sunflower seeds offers 10 grams of protein and almost 5
grams of fiber. Sunflower seeds are a great source of essential fatty acids
and zinc, which is important in prostate health as well as for overall
immune system health. Sunflower seeds are significantly high in magne-
sium, selenium, and folic acid.
Sweet Things
223
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.9 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.4 mg
Vitamin E
0.1 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
24.2 mg
Niacin
0.8 mg
Iron
1.3 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.1 mg
Phosphorus
133.2 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
67.3 mg
Folate (total)
41.7 µg
Zinc
1.0 mg
Vitamin C
0.3 mg
Potassium
134.0 mg


===PAGE 238===
Tahini–Almond Butter Cookies
PER SERVING: 121.1 CALORIES ~ 2.7 G PROTEIN ~ 17.3 G CARBOHYDRATE ~ 1.0 G FIBER ~ 5.0 G
TOTAL FAT ~ 0.6 G SATURATED FAT ~ 0.0 MG CHOLESTEROL ~ 119.2 MG SODIUM
This recipe came from one of my most diligent patients, Cyndi Stuart,
who has experimented on her own and has come up with some wonder-
ful recipes.
2½ cups oat flour (I make my own by tossing oatmeal into the food
processor)
½ teaspoon baking powder
½ teaspoon baking soda
¾ teaspoon sea salt
½ cup sesame butter (tahini)
½ cup almond butter (no salt or sugar added)
1 teaspoon vanilla
½ cup brown rice syrup
¼ cup raw honey
¼ cup real maple syrup
Preheat oven to 350° F.
In a small bowl mix together all of the dry ingredients and set aside.
With an electric mixer, blend the two butters together until smooth.
If they become so thick that the mixer has trouble moving through them,
add filtered water, 1 tablespoon at a time, but no more than 4 table-
spoons total.
Add the remaining wet ingredients, and beat on low speed until
blended.
Add the dry ingredients all at once, and beat together until well
blended. You may need to switch to a wooden spoon to finish the 
mixing.
Drop by tablespoonfuls onto an oiled baking sheet. Bake until the
cookies are lightly brown
but still slightly soft, 10–12
minutes. Cool on a wire
rack and serve. Makes
about 24 cookies.
Healthy Tidbit
One important aspect of
baking is to make sure your
224
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK
Nutritional Analysis per Serving
Vitamin A
0.1 RE
Vitamin D
0.0 µg
Thiamin (B-1)
0.1 mg
Vitamin E
0.0 mg
Riboflavin (B-2)
0.1 mg
Calcium
35.8 mg
Niacin
0.4 mg
Iron
0.9 mg
Vitamin B-6
0.0 mg
Phosphorus
89.3 mg
Vitamin B-12
0.0 µg
Magnesium
33.3 mg
Folate (total)
8.5 µg
Zinc
0.7 mg
Vitamin C
0.1 mg
Potassium
98.6 mg


===PAGE 239===
Sweet Things
225
ingredients are as pure as you can find. For example, aluminum is added
to many baking powders; to avoid it, it is vitally important to check
labels and to purchase all-natural products when you have the option.
And just because a product says it is “all natural” doesn’t always mean
it is good for you. Make sure to check labels for unhealthy ingredients.
An alternative to purchasing commercial baking powder is to make
your own. Blend 2 parts cream of tartar, 1 part baking soda, and 2 parts
arrowroot powder, and store in an airtight container. You can use this
mixture in any recipe that calls for baking powder.


===PAGE 240===
APPENDIX
Substitutions Chart
226

Eliminated Food
Cow’s milk
Commercial eggs
Sugar
Substitution
Soy milk, rice milk, sesame seed
milk, almond milk (or other nut
milk), oat milk
Organic eggs are fine for some
individuals. Or you can experi-
ment with some of the following
binders:
Flaxseeds soaked overnight in
water or boiled for 15 minutes
Tofu, for scrambles or baked
goods
Banana, to bind baked goods
(adds a sweet taste)
Arrowroot powder (use as a
binder for nongluten flours)
Guar gum (you need only a very
small amount)
Xantham gum
Honey (twice as sweet as
processed cane sugar)
Pure maple syrup
Brown rice syrup
Stevia
Directions
Substitute equal quantities
1–2 tablespoons seeds in ½–1
cup of water
¼ cup in place of 1 egg
½–1 banana in cookies or muffins
1 tablespoon for each cup of
nongluten flour
¼–½ teaspoon for muffins,
breads, and other baked goods
1 teaspoon for each cup of non-
gluten flour
½ amount recipe calls for
½–¾ amount recipe calls for
½–¾ amount recipe calls for
Small amount; label will have con-
versions


===PAGE 241===
Appendix: Subsitutions Chart
227
Substitution
When substituting these flours,
you may want to add a little more
baking powder or baking soda to
help the baked goods rise.
Amaranth (can have a strong
taste)
Barley (contains a small amount of
gluten)
Garbanzo
Kamut (contains gluten; should
not be eaten every day)
Oat (may contain a very small
amount of gluten)
Quinoa (can taste bitter; should be
mixed with other flours)
Rice (can be grainy; mix with other
flours)
Rye (contains gluten; should not
be eaten every day)
Soy (can have a beany flavor)
Spelt (contains gluten; should not
be eaten every day)
Teff
Yucca root, taro root, Jerusalem
artichokes (sunchokes)
Carob powder is nutritionally
superior to chocolate
Blend of organic butter and olive
oil (use as a spread)
Blend of organic butter and
coconut oil (use for baking)
Nonhydrogenated vegan marga-
rine spread
Almonds, almond butter
Directions
Needs a binder (see above)
May need a binder
Needs a binder
No binder is needed
May need a binder
Needs a binder
Needs a binder
No binder is needed
Needs a binder
No binder is needed
Needs a binder
Cook similar to potatoes
Substitute 3 tablespoons for 1
ounce chocolate
Substitute equal quantities
Substitute equal quantities
Eliminated Food
Wheat flour
Potatoes
Chocolate
Butter
Peanuts, peanut 
butter


===PAGE 242===
References
Airola, P. 1982. Every woman’s book. Phoenix, AZ: Health Plus Publishers.
American Heart Association. 2003. Eating breakfast may reduce risk of
obesity, diabetes, heart disease. Journal Report, March 6,
http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=3009715.
——. 2005. Dietary recommendations for children and adolescents: A guide
for practitioners: Consensus statement from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 112(13): 2061–2075.
Anderson, R. A. 2004. Autoimmunity and psychological states. Townsend
Letter for Doctors and Patients 250:46–59.
Braly, J., and R. Hoggan. 2002. Dangerous grains. New York: Penguin
Putnam Inc.
Bremness, L. 1994. Herbs: The visual guide to more than 700 herb species
from around the world. New York: DK Publishing.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2004. The burden of chronic
diseases and their risk factors: National and state perspectives.
http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/burdenbook2004/.
Ciubotaru, I., Y. S. Lee, and R. C. Wander. 2003. Dietary fish oil decreases
C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and triacyglycerol to HDL-cholesterol
ratio in postmenopausal women on HRT. The Journal of Nutritional
Biochemistry 14 (September): 513–21.
Cornell University. 2003. Too many sweetened drinks, from soda to lemon-
ade, put children at risk for obesity, poor nutrition, study at Cornell
finds. Cornell News, June 26, http://www.news.cornell.edu/
releases/June03/sweetdrink.kids.html.
Dasa, Kurma. 1990. Great vegetarian dishes: Over 240 recipes from around
the world. Los Angeles, CA: The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust.
DeNoon, Daniel. 2003. Sesame oil benefits blood pressure. WebMD Medi-
cal News, April 28, http://www.webmd.com/content/article/64/
72269.htm.
Draper, W. L. 1976. Secretory otitis media. Clinical Ecology 176–178.
Food and Drug Administration. 2004. FDA issues public health advisory on
Vioxx as its manufacturer voluntarily withdraws the product. FDA
News, September 30, http://www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/news/2004/
NEW01122.html.
228



===PAGE 243===
Fung, Teresa T., et al. 2000. Leisure-time physical activity, television watch-
ing, and plasma biomarkers of obesity and cardiovascular disease risk.
American Journal of Epidemiology 152(12): 1171–1178.
Gioannini, M. 1996. The complete food allergy cookbook: The foods you’ve
always loved without the ingredients you can’t have! Rocklin, CA: Prima
Publishing.
Gorman, C., and A. Park. 2004. The fires within. Time, February 23,
38–46.
Gueniot, Gerard. 2003. Individualized medicine. Lecture delivered at Port-
land Art Museum, Portland, OR.
Hippisley-Cox, Julie, and Carol Coupland. 2005. Risk of myocardial infarc-
tion in patients taking cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors or conventional
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: population based nested case-
control analysis. British Medical Journal 330 (June): 1366.
Hippisley-Cox, Julie, et al. 2005. Risk of adverse gastrointestinal outcomes
in patients taking cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors or conventional non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: population based nested case-control
analysis. British Medical Journal 331: 1310–1316.
Jenkins, David, J. A. 2003. Current dietary recommendations focusing on
diets low in saturated fat have been expanded to include foods high in
viscous fibers and plant sterols. Journal of American Medical Association
290: 502–10, 531–33.
Khan, Alam, et al. 2003. Cinnamon improves glucose and lipids of people
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care 26: 3215–18.
Kinderlehrer, Jane. 1971. Confessions of a sneaky organic cook. Emmaus,
PA: Rodale Press.
Knowler, William, et al. 2002. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes
with lifestyle intervention or metformin. New England Journal of Medi-
cine 346 (6): 393–403.
Lin, Robert Y., et al. 2001. Interleukin 6 and C-reactive protein levels in
patients with acute allergic reactions: an emergency department-based
study. Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology 87(5): 412–416.
Lindlahr, Henry. 1975. Philosophy of natural therapeutics. Essex, England:
The C.W. Daniel Company Limited.
Lindlahr, Henry. 1914. Nature cure: Philosophy and practice based on the
unity of disease and cure. Chicago, IL: The Nature Cure Publishing
Company.
Makino, Ayako, et al. 2003. Increased renal medullary H2O2 leads to hyper-
tension. Hypertension Journal 42:25.
Marz, Russel. 1999. Medical Nutrition from Marz, 2nd ed. Portland, OR:
Omni-Press.
Michels, Karin, et al. 2006. Preschool diet and adult risk of breast cancer.
International Journal of Cancer 118(3): 749–754.
References
229


===PAGE 244===
Moore, Helen, et al. 2000. Nutrition and the health care agenda: a primary
care perspective. Family Practice 17(2): 197–202.
Mozaffarian, Dariush, et al. 2004. Dietary intake of trans fatty acids and
systemic inflammation in women. The American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 79(4): 606–612.
Mozaffarian, Dariush, et al. 2004. Trans fatty acids and systemic inflamma-
tion in heart failure. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 80(6):
1521–1525.
National Cancer Institute. 2001. Questions and answers: Annual report to
the nation on the status of cancer, 1973–1998; feature focuses on can-
cers with recent increasing trends. National Cancer Institute Fact Sheets,
June 5, http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/1998-annual
-report-increasing-trends.
National Institutes of Health Office of the Director. 2004. NIH halts use of
COX-2 inhibitor in large cancer prevention trial. NIH News, December
17, http://www.nih.gov/news/pr/dec2004/od-17.htm.
Ngai P. H., and T. B. Ng. 2003. Lentin, a novel and potent antifungal pro-
tein from shitake mushroom with inhibitory effects on activity of human
immunodeficiency virus-1 reverse transcriptase and proliferation of
leukemia cells. Life Science 73(26): 3363–3374.
Osiecki, Henry. 2004. The role of chronic inflammation in cardiovascular
disease and its regulation by nutrients. Alternative Medicine Review 9(1):
35–53.
Pissorno, Joseph, and Michael Murray. 1998. Encyclopedia of natural
medicine. Rocklin, CA: Prima Publishing.
Pradhan, Aruna D., et al. 2001. C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and risk of
developing type 2 diabetes mellitus. Journal of American Medical
Association 286(3): 327–334.
Riedl, Marc, and Adrian Casillas. 2003. Adverse drug reactions: types and
treatment options. American Family Physician (November 1):
1781–1791.
Rodriguez-Cabezas, M.E., et al. 2003. Intestinal anti-inflammatory activity
of dietary fiber (plantago ovata seeds) in HLA-B27 transgenic rats.
Clinical Nutrition 22 (October): 463–71.
Rubin, Jordan. 2004. The maker’s diet. Lake Mary, FL: Siloam/Strang
Communications.
Sabaté, Joan, et al. 2003. Serum lipid response to the graduated enrichment
of a Step I diet with almonds: a randomized feeding trial. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition 77 (June): 1379–84.
Schlosser, Eric. 2002. Fast food nation: What the all-American meal is doing
to the world. London: Penguin Books.
Schmidt, Michael. 1996. Healing childhood ear infections. Berkeley, CA:
North Atlantic Books.
230
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 245===
Schulze, Matthias B., et al. 2005. Dietary pattern, inflammation, and inci-
dence of type 2 diabetes in women. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 82(3): 675–684.
Schwartz, Robert P. 2003. Soft drinks taste good, but the calories count.
Journal of Pediatrics 142 (June): 599–600.
Shikany, James, and George White, Jr. 2000. Dietary guidelines for chronic
disease prevention. Southern Medical Journal 93 (2000): 1157–61.
Soil Association (U.K.). 2006. Organic foods in relation to nutrition and
health: key facts. Soil Association Library, revised June 22, http://www
.soilassociation.org/web/sa/saweb.nsf/89D058CC4DBEB16D80256A730
05A2866/4156CFCC00A84E8C80256E6800584151?OpenDocument.
Thom, Dickson. 2003. Biotherapeutic drainage using the UNDA numbers.
Beaverton, OR: JELD Publications.
Thom, Dickson. 2002. Cellular and intracellular drainage with UNDA
numbers. Lecture delivered at Fifth Avenue Suites, Portland, OR.
Thom, Dickson. Cellular and intracellular drainage with UNDA numbers:
Advanced level. Lecture delivered at Fifth Avenue Suites, Portland, OR.
Tilgner, Sharol. 1999. Herbal medicine: From the heart of the earth.
Creswell, OR: Wise Acres Press.
Tufts University. 2000. Tufts’ blueberries research continues to generate
headlines. Tufts e-news, March 20, http://www.tufts.edu/communi
cations/stories/032000BlueberriesMakeMoreHeadlines.htm.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2004. Equivalence ensuring the flow of safe
meat, poultry and egg products across country borders.
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/PDF/Slides_051204_Swacina.pdf.
Wilkinson L., A. Scholey, and K. Wesnes. 2002. Chewing gum selectively
improves aspects of memory in healthy volunteers. Appetite 38:235–236.
Wood, Rebecca. 1988. The new whole foods encyclopedia. New York:
Penguin Books.
Wootan, Margo. 1996. Trans fat spells double trouble for arteries: What the
food labels don’t tell you. Center for Science in the Public Interest
(August 7), http://www.cspinet.org/new/transpr.html.
Yance, D. R., and A. Valentine. 1999. Herbal medicine, healing, and cancer:
A comprehensive program for prevention and treatment. Chicago, IL:
Keats Publishing.
Yamadal, Yuji, et al. 2005. Effects of bread containing resistant starch on
postprandial blood glucose levels in humans. Bioscience, Biotechnology,
and Biochemistry 69(3): 559–566.
References
231


===PAGE 246===
Online Resources
Author’s website, including contact info: www.afamilyhealingcenter.com
  
www.naturopathic.org — Website for the American Association of Naturo-
pathic Physicians; contains a database of naturopathic physicians by
state
www.cand.ca — Website for the Canadian Association of Naturopathic
Doctors; contains a database of naturopathic physicians by province
www.oanp.org — The Oregon Association of Naturopathic Physicians
www.healthrecipes.com — A great source for simple recipes
www.pubmed.com — Search here for articles from medical journals
www.medscape.com — Another source for articles from medical journals
and other reliable resources
www.nih.gov — Website for the National Institutes of Health; contains
links to many pages discussing chronic illnesses, healthy lifestyles, etc.
www.cdc.gov — Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
www.soilassociation.org — Information about organic foods from the U.K.
www.ewg.org — Environmental Working Group site that offers information
about environmental toxins and their health hazards
www.pfizer.com — Contains current research on their pharmaceuticals and
ongoing drug trials
www.ncnm.edu — National College of Naturopathic Medicine, Portland,
OR
www.bastyr.edu — Bastyr University (an accredited naturopathic college),
Kenmore, WA
www.scnm.edu — Southwest College of Naturopathic Medicine, Tempe,
AZ
www.bridgeport.edu/naturopathy — University of Bridgeport College of
Naturopathic Medicine, Bridgeport, CT
www.ccnm.edu — Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine, Toronto,
ON, Canada
232



===PAGE 247===
Index
Boldface page numbers refer to recipes located in the text.
233
A
Abraham, Wendy, N.D., 184
acetaminophen, 21
acidic foods, 29
adrenal function, 29, 103, 137, 143,
162
Adrenal Support Tea, 119
adrenaline, 19
Advil, 21
aflatoxins, 30–31
Africa, 97, 203
Airola, Paavo, N.D., 39
ALA (alpha-linoleic acid), 14, 105,
218
alcohol, 29
Aleve, 21
Alfalfa Sprouts, Home-Grown,
170–171
alkaline foods, 29, 123, 215
allergy response, controlling, 13–14.
See also food allergies
allium family, 160
allspice, 177
almond butter, 64, 222, 223
Almond Butter Cookies: Sandy’s,
222; Tahini, 224–225
Almond Chicken, Coconut, 133
Almond Milk, 44, 122–123
almonds: about, 72, 122–123; in
soup, 199
alpha-linoleic acid. See ALA
Alzheimer’s disease, 75
Amaranth, 164
American Heart Association, 106,
150
Americans: diet of, typical, 17, 31,
44, 61, 78, 105, 205, 219; lifestyle
of, typical, 2, 208
amino acids, 183
Anderson, Robert A., 21
aneurysms, 16
animal proteins, 28, 30
antibiotics, 8–9, 35
anti-inflammation diet: benefits,
9–11; elimination and challenge
phase of, 26–27, 32; summary,
41–44; tips, 42; transition to, 10
antioxidants, 64–65, 72, 75–76, 127,
188, 210
antiseptic and antiviral foods, 160,
162, 188, 189, 193
apple cider vinegar, 132, 182
Apples, Baked Red, 208
Applesauce, Chunky, 213
arachidonic acid, 14, 30, 140
arrowroot powder, 209
arthritis, 28, 31, 62, 203
Artichokes, Mashed Jerusalem, 69
artificial sweeteners, 32, 43
Ashley, Hannah, 90
Asian Noodles with Smoked Salmon,
Cold, 146–147
Asparagus à la Sweet Lemon, 57
aspartame, 32
aspirin, 21
Avena sativa, 103
Avocado Bean Salad, 168
Avocado Soup, 10-Minute, 206
Avocado Tuna Salad, 172
avocados, 35, 36, 63, 206
Ayurveda, 57, 123


===PAGE 248===
B
Baba Ghanoush, 58
Baked Chicken, Easy, 136–137
Baked Red Apples, 208
Baked Tofu, 126–127
baking, 36, 44
baking powder, 224–225
Banana Bread, The All-Forgiving,
96–97
bananas, 32, 97; as binder, 96, 110,
161–162, 209
Bananas, Frozen, 215
Barbequed Kafta, 128
Barley, 164
basil, 149
Basil Pesto, 59
Bean Salad: Avocado, 168; Beet and,
173–174; Garlic, 180
beans, 143; garbanzo, 64–65; sprout-
ing, 170–171. See also legumes
beef, 30, 35, 43
Beet and Bean Salad, 173–174
Beet Salad, Carrot, 184
Beet Soup, Raw, 202
beets, 184
Beets, Simple and Delectable, 81
bento (Japanese style rice and vegeta-
bles), 82
beverages: to avoid, 28, 29–30, 44;
children’s consumption of, 117;
sugar in, 117, 205
binders: in cooking, 96, 110,
161–162, 209; heavy metal, 5, 17,
71, 172, 203
Black, Jason, N.D., 191
Black, Sadie, 9, 199
Blackened Salmon, 129
blood, 6; circulation, 135, 184, 189;
cleansers, 195; clots, 13–14, 100,
160
blood pressure, 16, 117, 126–127
blood sugar: carbohydrates and, 40;
stabilizing, 50, 91, 92, 100, 115;
stress and, 19–21
blueberries, 210
Blueberry Upside-Down Cake,
209–210
borage oil, 37
Brady, James, 31
Bread, Hannah’s Rice Flour, 90–91
Bread, Spelt, 93–94
Bread, The All-Forgiving Banana,
96–97
Bread, Zucchini, 98
breading, 130–131
breads, 38
breakfast: importance of, 46, 106;
Summer menu, sample, 52; Winter
menu, sample, 53
Breakfast Eggnog, 114
Breakfast, Five-Minute, 100
Breakfast, Protein Power, 105
Breakfast Smoothie, 115
breast cancer, 44–45, 219
breast milk, 14
Broccoli and Olive Frittata, 101–102
bromelain, 41
broth: making, 48–49, 194–195; sub-
stitutions, 155, 192–193
Brown Rice, 165
brown rice syrup, 96, 216
burdock root, 193
Burgers, Falafel, 138–139
Burgers, Leftover Veggie, 140
butter, 36, 44, 50, 218, 227
Butter Spread, Olive Oil–, 71
C
Cabbage, Cashew, 60
caffeine, 29
Cake, Blueberry Upside-Down,
209–210
calcium, 28, 40, 101–102, 122
Calming Tea, 118
calorie intake, 34, 42
Canada, canola oil in, 36
cancer: breast, 44–45, 219; colon,
61, 156; foods for preventing, 61,
75–76, 86, 156, 160; French fries
link to, 44–45. See also antioxi-
dants
canned foods, 174
canola oil, 36, 38
carbohydrates, 34, 40, 46
cardiovascular risk factors. See heart
disease
234
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 249===
carob, 50, 215
Carrot and Ginger Soup, Cream of,
196–197
Carrot Beet Salad, 184
Carrot Raisin Cookies, 211–212
Carrot Salad, Italian, 181
carrots, 197
Cashew Cabbage, 60
cayenne pepper, 58, 129
Celebrex, 22
celery, 195
celiac disease, 31, 110–111, 112–113
cereals, 38, 46
Chai, 118
cheese substitutes, 148
chelation, 5
chewing, 45–46, 131
chicken, 35
Chicken Breast with “Peanut” Curry
Sauce, Stuffed, 153–154
Chicken, Coconut Almond, 133
Chicken Curry Made Simple, 132
Chicken, Easy Baked, 136–137
Chicken, Pesto Pizza with, 148–149
Chicken Salad, Curry, 178
chickpeas. See garbanzo beans
children: beverage consumption by,
117; cooking for, 48–49, 96, 199,
211, 215; development of, healthy,
8–9; digestive system of, 45; French
fries consumption by, 45
China, 212
chocolate substitutes, 50, 215, 227
cholesterol: in eggs, 104; lowering, 3,
37, 103, 160, 181, 182; produc-
tion, 20, 36, 40; television and,
208
chronic disease, 13, 15–19, 27,
155–156
chronic pain, 18, 129
cilantro, 59, 63, 77, 80, 144–145
cinnamon, 50, 100
cinnamon-leaf oil, 100
citrus fruits, 31
clary sage, 162
Cleansing Tea, 119
Cleeton, James, 41–42
coconut, 134
Coconut Almond Chicken, 133
coconut oil, 36–37, 44
Coconut Soup, Tangy, 204–205
Coconut Vanilla “Ice Cream,” 214
coffee, 29
Cold Asian Noodles with Smoked
Salmon, 146–147
cold sores, 183
colds, relieving, 180, 212
Coleslaw, Colorful, 175
colon cancer, 61, 156
The Complete Food Allergy Cook-
book (Gioannini), 107, 161, 211
Confessions of a Sneaky Organic
Cook (Kinderlehrer), 48, 199
Cookies: Almond Butter, Sandy’s,
222; Carrot Raisin, 211–212; Gin-
ger Snaps, 216; Ginger Spice, 217;
Hearty Healthy, 218; Oatmeal,
No-Bake, 220; Tahini-Almond
Butter, 224–225
cookies, baking, 49–50, 50, 218
coriander, 144–145
corn, 31
cortisol, elevated, 19–21, 29
cows, 28–29, 30
cramps, 27, 113, 145
C-reactive protein (CRP), 3, 31, 156
Cream of Carrot and Ginger Soup,
196–197
CRP. See C-reactive protein
Cucumber Salad, 176
cumin, 179
Curried Quinoa Salad, 177
Curry Chicken Salad, 178
Curry Garbanzo Salad, 179
Curry Hummus, Nut ’n’, 64–65
Curry Made Simple, Chicken, 132
curry powder, 178
Curry Sauce, “Peanut,” Stuffed
Chicken Breast with, 153–154
Curry, Sweet Sprout, 155–156
Curry, Thai Red, 157–158
cyclooxygenase, 14, 21–22
D
dairy, 28, 60, 214
Dal, Mung, 144
Index
235


===PAGE 250===
Dangerous Grains (Brady and Hog-
gan), 31
death (in United States), causes of, 2,
39
Detoxification Tea, 119
DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), 14
DHEA, 18, 20
diabetes (type-II): risk reduction, 3,
46, 80, 91, 106, 218; understand-
ing, 17–18
diclofenac, 22
diet: AHA recommendations for,
150; American, typical, 17, 31, 44,
61, 78, 105, 205, 219; components
of, 34–41; elimination and chal-
lenge, 26–27, 32; food allergies
and, 25–27, 28–32; Mediterranean,
138–139, 179; toxic overload and,
23–24. See also anti-inflammation
diet
Digestion Tea, Easy, 120
digestive system, 23; chewing and,
45–46, 131; children v. adult, 45;
cow’s v. pig’s, 30; fiber for, 40–41;
foods for, 63, 128, 145, 149, 152,
170–171, 179, 182, 213; lifestyle
and, 44–45; raw foods and, 169,
176, 202. See also enzymes
dill, 202
dinner menus, 52–53
diphtheria, 7
disease, 6–8, 12; celiac, 31, 110–111,
112–113; chronic, 13, 15–19, 27,
155–156; symptoms, 2–3. See also
cancer; diabetes (type-II); heart dis-
ease
diverticulitis, 61
docosahexaenoic acid. See DHA
Dr. Erika’s Quinoa Stir Fry, 135
Dr. Fisel’s Squash Soup, 198
Dr. Fisel’s Tofu Scramble, 109
Dr. Jason’s Savory Mushroom Soup,
191
Dolmades (Stuffed Grape Leaves),
83–84
Downey, Michael, 12
Draper, Leonard, M.D., 214
Dubos, Rene, 7
dyes, food, 32–33
E
ear infections, 214
Earth Balance margarine, 71
EDTA (ethylene-diamine-tetra-acetic
acid), 5
Eggnog, Breakfast, 114
eggplant, 58
eggs: about, 30, 35; Broccoli and
Olive Frittata, 101–102; cholesterol
in, 104; cooking, 35, 39; raw, 114;
substitution for, 161–162, 226
Eggs, Mexican Morning, 104
eicosanoids, 105
eicosapentaenoic acid. See EPA
elimination and challenge diet,
26–27, 32
emotions, negative, 20–21
endocrine system, regulating, 103,
105, 137
energy: Adrenal Support Tea for,
119; foods supplying, 24–25, 45,
80, 88, 103, 134, 183, 217; stabi-
lizing, 19–20, 34–35. See also
adrenal function; blood sugar
energy bars, 38
enzymes: importance of, 14; inhibi-
tion of, 21–22, 26; production of,
131, 185; in raw foods, 170–171,
176, 185
EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid), 14
epithelial cells, 16
erepsin, 176
essential fatty acids, 37–38, 41, 105
ethylene-diamine-tetra-acetic acid. See
EDTA
exercise, 17, 52, 208
experimentation, recipe, 46, 50, 136
eyesight, 102, 187, 197
F
Falafel Burgers, 138–139
family, converting, 48–49
Family Practice, 3
fast food, 44–45, 78
Fast Food Nation (Schlosser), 44, 78
fat: about, 34, 35–39; cells, 17; dairy,
28; meat, 30; organic, 36, 71;
236
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 251===
plant-based, 134; storage, 40; tox-
ins in, 17, 28, 36, 71
fatty acids. See essential fatty acids;
prostaglandins
FDA (Food and Drug Administra-
tion), canola oil and, 36
female hormones, 36, 57, 108, 203
fiber, 40–41, 61, 82
fibromyalgia, 18
Findley, Stephanie, 132
Fisel, Matt, N.D., 109, 157, 192,
198, 216
fish, cold-water, 14, 37–38. See also
specific types of cold-water fish
flat bread, 112
flaxseeds, 38, 40–41, 52, 105, 209
flours, 164; substituting, 50, 90,
96–97, 209, 212, 227
food(s): acidic, 29; alkaline, 29, 123,
215; antioxidant, 64–65, 72,
75–76, 127, 188, 210; antiseptic
and antiviral, 160, 162, 188, 189,
193; cancer-prevention, 61, 75–76,
86, 156, 160; canned, 174; choles-
terol-lowering, 3, 37, 103, 160,
181, 182; for digestion, 63, 128,
145, 149, 152, 170–171, 179, 182,
213; dyed, 32–33; energy from,
24–25, 45, 80, 88, 103, 134, 183,
217; fast, 44, 78; fried, 32, 39;
genetically modified, 31, 108;
“health,” 38; hydrogenated oils in,
38–39; for insomnia, 103, 202;
positive, 41, 42–44; pregnancy-
affecting, 186, 193; processed,
44–45; prostaglandin producing,
14; in schools, 45, 78; shopping list
for, 50–51; for skin health, 60, 62,
193, 197; toxins, metabolizing,
23–24. See also organic foods; raw
foods
food allergies: about, 24, 25–27;
common, other, 32–33; dairy, 28,
60, 214; soybean, 108; symptoms
of, 32; wheat, 27, 31, 40, 43,
110–111. See also foods to avoid
Food and Drug Administration. See
FDA
food(s), to avoid: about, 28–32; non-
reaction to, 10–11; overview,
42–44
free radicals, 64–65. See also oxida-
tive stress
French fries, 44–45, 62
“French Fries,” 62, 87
fried foods, 32, 39
Frittata, Broccoli and Olive, 101–102
fruit: Breakfast Smoothie, 115; citrus,
31; dried, 32; frozen, 112, 115;
juice, 29, 117; Sherbet, Quick, 221;
types of, 43
G
garbanzo beans, 64–65
Garbanzo Salad, Curry, 179
gardens, planning, 128, 200
garlic, 160, 180, 189
Garlic Bean Salad, 180
Garlic, Delicious Green Beans with,
61
gastrointestinal tract, 18, 21–22, 26,
29. See also digestive system;
intestinal health
General Mills, 38
Generally Recognized as Safe list. See
GRAS list
genetically modified foods, 31, 108
Germ Theory, 7–8
ginger, 212
Ginger Snaps, 216
Ginger Soup, Cream of Carrot and,
196–197
Ginger Spice Cookies, 217
Gioannini, Marilyn, 107, 161, 211
gluten: celiac disease and, 31,
110–111, 112–113; substitutes, 92,
110
graham crackers, 38
grains, 31; benefits, 40, 46; cooking,
164–166; protein from, 35, 40;
types of, 43
Granola, 103
Grape Leaves, Stuffed (Dolmades),
83–84
GRAS list (Generally Recognized as
Safe), 36
Index
237


===PAGE 252===
Greeks, 145, 179, 189
Green Beans, Scrumptious, 79–80
Green Beans with Garlic, Delicious,
61
Grilling, Vegetable Marinade for, 88
growth hormones, 18
Guacamole, 63
guar gum, 92, 110
Gueniot, Gerard, 7, 45
H
halibut, 14, 37–38
Hannah’s Rice Flour Bread, 90–91
Harvard Medical School, 44–45
hawthorn (leaves and berries), 117
“health” foods, 38
health paradigm, 2–3
heart disease: risk factors, 15–17, 22;
studies, 106, 155–156
Hecate, 189
Herbal “Juice,” 117
herbs, 43, 46
HIV, 114, 191
Hoggan, Ron, 31
holidays. See Thanksgiving dinners
honey, 81
Honey Lemon Salad, Spicy, 185
Honey Millet Muffins, 92
hormones: endocrine system regula-
tion, 103, 105, 137; female, 36, 57,
108, 203; growth, 18; stress-
response, 19–21
Hummus, Nut ’n’ Curry, 64–65
Hungarian cooking, 58
hydrogenated oils, 32, 38–39, 44, 71
hypertension, 16
I
ibuprofen, 21, 22
“Ice Cream,” Coconut Vanilla, 214
IL-6. See interleukin-6
Immune Booster Tea, 120
immune cells, 16
“immune downregulation,” 21, 201
immune response: building strong,
8–9; negative emotions and, 20–21;
against self, 30; suppression, 8. See
also food allergies
inflammation: acute, importance of,
12; controlling, 13–15; defined,
12–13; diabetes and, 17–18; food
allergies and, 25–27; heart disease
and, 15–17; insomnia and, 18–19;
pain, chronic, and, 18; stress and,
19–21; subclinical, 3
insect repellent, 36
insomnia, 18–19, 103, 120, 202
insulin, 20, 40, 46
interleukin-6 (IL-6), 20, 31
intestinal health, 59, 176, 213
inulin, 69
iodine, 142
isoflavones, 108
Italian Carrot Salad, 181
J
Japan, 212, 219
Jerusalem Artichokes, Mashed, 69
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 39
juice, 29
“Juice,” Herbal, 117
K
Kafta, Barbequed, 128
Khan, Alam, 100
kidney function, 23–24
Kinderlehrer, Jane, 199
kitchen items, 50–51
L
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 26
Lactobacillus bifidus, 26
lamb, 83–84; Barbequed Kafta, 128
leeks, 160
Leftover Veggie Burgers, 140
leftovers, using, 100, 104, 107, 109,
135, 154, 194–195
legumes, 35, 38, 40, 43, 143. See also
specific types of legumes
Lemon, Asparagus à la Sweet, 57
Lemon Salad, Spicy Honey, 185
Lemon Vegetable Rice, 66–67, 153
Lemon Vinaigrette Salad, Tasty, 188
lemons, 67
Lentil and Nut Loaf, 143
238
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 253===
leukemia, 191
lifestyle choices, 2, 44–45, 150, 208
lime leaves, kaffir, 158, 204
Lindlahr, Henry, M.D., 6
linoleic acid, 14
lipooxygenase, 14
liver function, 23–24, 70, 101–102,
213, 217
lunch menus, 52–53
lung function, 59, 69, 215
lutein, 187
lymph, 6
lysine, 183
M
mackerel, 14, 37–38
The Maker’s Diet (Rubin), 30
Makino, Ayako, 65
Maki-zushi (Sushi Rolls), 141–142
Mango Salsa, 68; Breaded Red Snap-
per with, 130–131
mangos, 68
margarine, 38–39, 71
Marinade for Grilling, Vegetable, 88
marjoram, 200
Mashed “Potatoes” (Mashed
Jerusalem Artichokes), 69
mealtime recommendations, 45–46,
132, 137, 154, 201
meat, 32, 43, 171
Meatloaf, Turkey, 161–162
meatloaf, vegetarian, 143
Mediterranean diet, 138–139, 179.
See also Middle-Eastern dishes
memory, improving, 131, 210
menopause, 108
menstrual cycles, 36, 57
menus, seasonal, 51–53
metabolism, 10, 19, 23–24, 46
metformin, 3
Mexican Morning Eggs, 104
Mexican Salad, 182
Mezza Luna Pizzeria’s Pizza Sauce,
150
Michels, Karin, 45
Middle-Eastern dishes, 58, 64–65,
83–84, 128, 138–139, 176
migraines, 27, 145
milk (cow’s), 28–29, 226. See also
other types of milk
Milk Thistle Seasoning Salt, 70
Millet, 92, 165
Millet Muffins, Honey, 92
mint, 221
Mochi with Yogurt, 219
Monagle, J.K., N.D., 64
monosodium glutamate. See MSG
monounsaturated fats, 36
mood changes, 27, 32; stabilizing,
34–35, 38, 117
Mood Tea, Simple, 119
“morbid matter,” 6, 26
Morning Eggs, Mexican, 104
Motrin, 21
MSG (monosodium glutamate), 32
Muffins, Honey Millet, 92
mung bean sprouts, 155
Mung Dal, 144
Mushroom Soup, Dr. Jason’s Savory,
191
mushrooms, 86, 191
Mushrooms, Stuffed, 85–86
mustard gas, 36
mustard seeds, 135
N
Nabisco, 38
naproxen, 21, 22
National College of Naturopathic
Medicine (NCNM), 10
Native American sweat lodges, 75
naturopathy, 2–3, 5
Nazario, Brunilda, N.D, 126
nervous system, 38, 120, 201
neurological conditions, causes of,
111
neuropeptides, 19–20
New England Journal of Medicine, 3
night, eating at, 46
nightshade vegetables, 28, 58
nitric oxide, 16–17
nitrites, 32
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. See NSAIDs
Noodles with Smoked Salmon, Cold
Asian, 146–147
Index
239


===PAGE 254===
NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drugs), 21–22
Nut Loaf, Lentil and, 143
Nut ’n’ Curry Hummus, 64–65
nutmeg, 57, 198
NutraSweet, 32, 43
nuts, 35, 37–38, 44, 105, 174; bread-
ing fish with, 130; in pesto, 59. See
also specific types of nuts
Nutty Onion Soup, 199–200
O
Oatmeal Cookies, No-Bake, 220
Oatmeal You’ll Ever Eat, Quickest,
106
oats: about, 103; cooking, 166
obesity, 40, 78, 106, 208
oils: borage, 37; canola, 36, 38; clary
sage, 162; coconut, 36–37, 44;
coriander, 145; essential fatty acids
in, 37–38, 41; fish, 41; heating, 37,
39, 44; hydrogenated, 32, 38–39,
44, 71; olive, 36, 37, 44, 139, 181,
188; oxidative stress and, 36–37;
primrose, 37; pumpkin, 158; rape-
seed, 36; sesame, 126–127; vege-
table (sunflower, safflower,
sesame), 14
Olive Frittata, Broccoli and, 101–102
olive leaf extract, 188
olive oil, 36, 37, 44, 139, 181, 188
Olive Oil–Butter Spread, 71
omega-3 fatty acids, 37–38, 105
omega-6 fatty acids, 37, 105
Onion Soup, Nutty, 199–200
onions, 32, 160
organic foods: fats, 36, 71; impor-
tance of eating, 25, 28, 29, 41–42;
meat, 30; proteins, 35
oxidative stress, 16–17, 35, 36–37,
65
P
pain, 18, 129
Pancakes, Easy, 112–113
Pancakes, Wheat-Free, 110–111
paprika, 58
parasympathetic nervous system, 201
parsley, 59, 128
Pasteur, Louis, 7
peanut butter, 38, 44
“Peanut” Curry Sauce, Stuffed
Chicken Breast with, 153–154
“Peanut” Sauce, 72
peanuts, 30–31, 44, 227
pears, substituting with, 208, 213
pesticides, 28, 60
pesto, 59, 149
Pesto Pizza with Chicken, 148–149
Pfizer, Inc., 22
PGEs. See prostaglandins
pharmaceuticals, 2, 3, 21–22, 23–24
Phillips, Chelsea, MSOM, 144
phospholipase A2 (PLA2), 14
pigs, 30
pine nuts, 59
pineapple, 41
Pizza Sauce, Mezza Luna Pizzeria’s,
150
Pizza with Chicken, Pesto, 148–149
PLA2. See phospholipase A2
planning meals, 46, 47, 49, 137
polyunsaturated fats, 36, 37–38
Poppy Seed Rice, 73–74
poppy seeds, 73–74
pork, 30
potatoes, 28, 62, 227; Mashed “Pota-
toes” (Mashed Jerusalem Arti-
chokes), 69. See also Sweet Potato
potlucks, 47, 136, 175, 192
prayer, 154
pregnancy, foods affecting, 186, 193
pretzels, 38
primary-care physicians, 3–4
primrose oil, 37
processed foods, 44–45
prostaglandins (PGEs), 13–15, 21
prostate health, 158
protein(s): animal, 28, 30; benefits of,
43; gluten, 31, 111; grains and, 35,
40; plant, 105, 109, 166, 174, 183,
215, 222; proportion of, 34;
sources of, 34–35
protein powders, 115
Protein Power Breakfast, 105
pumpkin, 158; seeds, 14, 35, 158
purées, 49
240
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 255===
Q
qi gong, 21
Quataert, Pam, 136
Quinoa, 166
Quinoa Salad, Curried, 177
Quinoa Stir Fry, Dr. Erika’s, 135
Quinoa Vegetable Salad, 183
R
radishes, 152
Raisin Cookies, Carrot, 211–212
rapeseed oil, 36
rashes, 38. See also skin
Raspberry Vinaigrette Salad, Spicy,
186
Raw Beet Soup, 202
raw foods: digestion, 169, 176, 202;
eggs, 114; enzymes in, 169, 176;
vegetables, 102, 175
Raw Vegetables, Seared Tuna over,
151–152
reishi mushrooms, 86
relaxation, 120, 176, 201
rice: brown, cooking, 165; leftovers,
100, 104; sushi, 141–142
Rice Flour Bread, Hannah’s, 90–91
Rice, Lemon Vegetable, 66–67, 153
Rice, Poppy Seed, 73–74
Ritz Crackers, 38
rofecoxib, 22
Rold Gold, 38
rosemary, 75–76
Rosemary Squash, 75–76
Rubin, Jordan, 30
rye, 217
S
sage, 162
Salad: Avocado Tuna, 172; Beet and
Bean, 173–174; Carrot Beet, 184;
Cucumber, 176; Curried Quinoa,
177; Curry Chicken, 178; Curry
Garbanzo, 179; Garlic Bean, 180;
Italian Carrot, 181; Lemon Vinai-
grette, Tasty, 188; Mexican, 182;
Not-So-Greek, 189; Quinoa Vege-
table, 183; Spicy Honey Lemon,
185; Spicy Raspberry Vinaigrette,
186; Strawberry Spinach, 187
Salad Rolls, 77–78
salads, benefits of, 185. See also raw
foods
salmon, 14, 37–38, 146–147
Salmon, Blackened, 129
Salmon, Cold Asian Noodles with
Smoked, 146–147
salmonella, 114
Salsa, Mango, 68
Salt, Milk Thistle Seasoning, 70
sardines, 14, 37–38
saturated fats, 36
Sauce, Mezza Luna Pizzeria’s Pizza,
150
Sauce, “Peanut,” 72
Sauce, “Peanut” Curry, Stuffed
Chicken Breast with, 153–154
Schlosser, Eric, 44, 78
Scholey, Andrew, 131
schools, foods in, 45, 78
seafood, 43
Seared Tuna over Raw Vegetables,
151–152
seasickness, 58
seasonings, 107, 129, 136, 159–160
seaweed, 70, 142
seeds (pumpkin, sesame, sunflower),
14, 35, 37–38, 158; breading fish
with, 130, 131; sprouting,
170–171. See also flaxseeds
serotonin, 18
Sesame Milk, 124
sesame oil, 126–127
sesame seeds, 14, 35
shellfish, 30, 43
Sherbet, Quick, 221
shiitake mushrooms, 86, 191
shopping, 50–51
Siegel, Erika, N.D., L.Ac., 110, 135,
138–139, 202
sinusitis, 188
skin: conditions, 6, 22, 32, 38; foods
for good, 60, 62, 193, 197
sleep, 18. See also insomnia
Sleepy Tea, 120
Smoked Salmon, Cold Asian Noodles
with, 146–147
Index
241


===PAGE 256===
smooth muscle cells, 16
Smoothie, Breakfast, 115
snacks, 49, 52, 53
Snapper with Mango Salsa, Breaded
Red, 130–131
Solanaceae family, 28, 58
Soup: Avocado, 10-Minute, 206;
Beet, Raw, 202; Clean-Out-the-
Refrigerator, 194–195; Coconut,
Tangy, 204–205; Cream of Carrot
and Ginger, 196–197; Dr. Fisel’s
Squash, 198; Mushroom, Dr.
Jason’s Savory, 191; Nutty Onion,
199–200; Quick Turkey, 201;
Sweet Potato, 203; Winter,
192–193
soups, 48–49, 199. See also broth
soy, 35, 43, 109
soy milk, 44, 196
soybean oil, 38
soybeans, 14, 107
spelt, 94, 110
Spelt Bread, 93–94
Spelt Tortillas, 95
spices, 43, 46. See also specific types
of spices
Spicy Honey Lemon Salad, 185
Spicy Raspberry Vinaigrette Salad,
186
spinach, in pesto, 59
Spinach Salad, Strawberry, 187
spirituality, 154, 162
Sprout Curry, Sweet, 155–156
sprouts, growing, 170–171
squash, butternut, 192, 198
Squash, Rosemary, 75–76
Squash Soup, Dr. Fisel’s, 198
starch, resistant, 91
statin, 3
steaming, 42
Stir Fry, Dr. Erika’s Quinoa, 135
Stir Fry, Simple, 159–160
Stock, Sandy, 222
Strawberry Spinach Salad, 187
stress, 19–21, 119, 162, 220. See also
adrenal function
The Stress Reliever (tea), 119
Stuart, Cyndi, 217
Stuffed Chicken Breast with “Peanut”
Curry Sauce, 153–154
Stuffed Grape Leaves (Dolmades),
83–84
Stuffed Mushrooms, 85–86
substitutions, 226–227; broth, 155,
192–193; butter, 50, 218, 227;
cheese, 148; chocolate, 50, 215,
227; cilantro, 77, 80; coconut milk,
133; eggs, 161–162, 226; flour, 50,
90, 96–97, 209, 212, 227; fruit
juice, 117; gluten, 92, 110; milk
(cow’s), 226; peanut, 30–31, 44,
227; pear, 208, 213; pesto, 59;
potato, 62, 227; sugar, 50, 81, 96,
204–205, 226; tea, herbal, 121;
vegetarian, 133
sugars, 29, 30, 32, 40; in beverages,
117, 205; substitutions, 50, 81, 96,
204–205, 226
Summer menu, sample, 52
Sun Candies, 223
sunflower seeds, 14, 35, 223
surgery paradigm, 2
Sushi Rolls (Maki-zushi), 141–142
sweat lodges, Native American, 75
Sweet Potato “Fries,” 87
Sweet Potato Soup, 203
Sweet Sprout Curry, 155–156
T
Tahini–Almond Butter Cookies,
224–225
tarragon vinegar, 182
tea, herbal, 29, 44; how to make,
120–121; raspberries in, 186;
recipes, 117–120; substitutions,
121
Tea to Relax the Nerves, 120
television, 208
teriyaki sauce, 151
Thai dishes, 72, 77–78, 204–205
Thai Red Curry, 157–158
thanks, giving, 154
Thanksgiving dinners, 69, 208, 213
Thom, Dickson, N.D., 7, 9, 71
thyroid function, 19, 36, 102, 137,
142, 175
242
THE ANTI-INFLAMMATION DIET AND RECIPE BOOK


===PAGE 257===
Tiger’s Milk energy bars, 38
tofu, 43, 133
Tofu, Baked, 126–127
Tofu Scramble, 107–108; Dr. Fisel’s,
109
tomatoes, 27, 28, 68, 150, 155
Tortillas, Spelt, 95
Total Bran Flakes, 38
toxins: accumulation of, 6–7, 35; in
beverages, 29; in dairy, 28; elimi-
nation of, 17, 40–41, 86; in fat,
17, 28, 36, 71; sources of, 23–24
trans fatty acids, 37, 39
tuna, 14, 37–38, 140
Tuna over Raw Vegetables, Seared,
151–152
Tuna Salad, Avocado, 172
turkey, 35
Turkey Meatloaf, 161–162
Turkey Soup, Quick, 201
Tylenol, 8–9, 21
U
Unterseher, Ben, 112
V
Vanilla “Ice Cream,” Coconut, 214
Vegetable Marinade for Grilling, 88
Vegetable Rice, Lemon, 66–67
Vegetable Salad, Quinoa, 183
vegetables: American intake of, 88; to
avoid, 28, 42; good, 40, 42; leafy
green, 40, 169, 187; leftovers, 107,
109; nightshade, 28, 58; prepara-
tion of, 47; raw, 102, 175; sneak-
ing in, 48–49; steaming, 42, 82; for
stir fry, 159–160. See also specific
types of vegetables
Vegetables, Seared Tuna over Raw,
151–152
Vegetables, Steamed, 82
Veggie Burgers, Leftover, 140
Vietnamese dishes, 77–78
Vinaigrette Salad: Spicy Raspberry,
186; Tasty Lemon, 188
vinegar, 32, 132, 182
Vioxx, 22
W
walnuts, 14, 218
water, 29, 32, 41, 44
wheat: allergies, 27, 31, 40, 43,
110–111; flour substitutes, 227
Wheat-Free Pancakes, 110–111
Winter menu, sample, 53
Winter Soup, 192–193
women: breast cancer, 44–45, 219;
hormones, 36, 108, 203
Wootan, Margo, 38
Y
yams, 203
Yance, Donald, 39
Yogurt, Mochi with, 219
yucca root, 62
Z
zinc, 40
zucchini, 50, 66, 98, 218
Zucchini Bread, 98
Index
243


===PAGE 258===
TITLE 
QTY 
PRICE 
TOTAL
Anti-Inflammation Diet ... (paperback)
@   $14.95
Anti-Inflammation Diet ... (spiral bound)
@   $19.95
Prices subject to change without notice
List other Hunter House titles below:
@   $
@   $
@   $
@   $
@   $
@   $
@   $
Check here to receive our book catalog
J
FREE
O R D E R F O R M
Shipping Costs
By Priority Mail: first book
$4.50, each additional
book $1.00
By UPS and to Canada:
first book $5.50, each
additional book $1.50
For rush orders and other
countries call us at 
(510) 865-5282
TOTAL
Less discount @–––––%
(
)
TOTAL COST OF BOOKS
–––––––––––
Calif. residents add sales tax
–––––––––––
Shipping & handling
–––––––––––
TOTAL ENCLOSED
Please pay in U.S. funds only
J Check  J Money Order  J Visa  J MasterCard  J Discover
Card #_______________________________ Exp. date _______
Signature_____________________________________________
Complete and mail to:
Hunter House Inc., Publishers
PO Box 2914, Alameda CA 94501-0914
Website: www.hunterhouse.com
Orders: (800) 266-5592 or email: ordering@hunterhouse.com
Phone (510) 865-5282 Fax (510) 865-4295
10% DISCOUNT on orders of $50 or more —
20% DISCOUNT on orders of $150 or more —
30% DISCOUNT on orders of $500 or more —
On cost of books for fully prepaid orders
NAME
ADDRESS
CITY/STATE
ZIP/POSTCODE
PHONE
COUNTRY (outside of U.S.)
AID - 8/2006
Ê
