===PAGE 2===
Register Now for Online Access 
to Your Book!
View all our products at springerpub.com
Scan here for 
quick access. 
Your print purchase of Public Health Nutrition includes online access to the 
contents of your book—increasing accessibility, portability, and searchability! 
Access today at:
http://connect.springerpub.com/content/book/978-0-8261-4685-4
or scan the QR code at the right with your smartphone
and enter the access code below.
If you are experiencing problems accessing the digital component of this product, please contact our 
customer service department at cs@springerpub.com
The online access with your print purchase is available at the publisher’s discretion and may be 
removed at any time without notice.
Publisher’s Note: New and used products purchased from third-party sellers are not guaranteed for 
quality, authenticity, or access to any included digital components.
SPC
WJNRVAP2


===PAGE 3===
M. Margaret Barth, PhD, MPH, serves as Professor and Chair of Nutrition 
and Health Care Management at Appalachian State University. Dr. Barth 
received her PhD in Nutrition and Food Science from University of Illinois, 
Urbana–Champaign; MPH from University of Illinois, Chicago; MBA 
from Th e Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University; and 
BS in Nutrition and Medical Dietetics from University of Illinois, Chicago. 
Dr. Barth has served in leadership roles in academia and food organiza-
tions in areas of nutrition, food systems, and sustainability and developed 
research and service learning projects in the United States, Mexico, South 
America, Philippines, and China. Publications include authorship of more 
than 50 scientifi c research papers along with invited review articles, book 
chapters, and government references on nutritional quality, public health 
nutrition, food safety, and community food systems. Recipient of the high-
est alumni award from the University of Illinois, College of Agriculture, 
Consumer and Environmental Sciences in 2014. In addition to professional activities in the American Public 
Health Association (APHA), World Public Health Nutrition Association (WPHNA), and Association of 
State Public Health Nutritionists (ASPHN), she serves as an advisor to nonprofi t organizations.
Ronny A. Bell, PhD, MS, is Professor (with Tenure) and Chair of the 
Department of Public Health in the Brody School of Medicine at East 
Carolina University (ECU). Prior to his appointment at ECU, Dr. Bell was 
Professor of Public Health Sciences and Director of the Maya Angelou 
Center for Health Equity at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center. Dr. Bell 
received his undergraduate degree in Public Health Nutrition from the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and his master’s and doctorate 
in Foods and Nutrition at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. 
He completed a postdoctoral fellowship in Gerontology and a master’s 
degree in Epidemiology at the Wake Forest School of Medicine. Dr. Bell’s 
research focuses on chronic disease epidemiology and prevention in racial 
and ethnic minority populations with a focus on American Indian popu-
lations. He currently chairs the North Carolina Diabetes Advisory Council 
and the North Carolina American Indian Health Board and co-chairs the 
Healthy North Carolina 2030 Task Force. Nationally, he currently serves 
on the American Diabetes Association Health Disparities Committee.
Karen Grimmer, PhD, MMedSci, CertHlthEc, is a Senior Researcher 
in Clinical Education and Training in the College of Nursing and Health 
Sciences at Flinders University in Adelaide, South Australia and Professor 
Extraordinaire at Stellenbosch University in Cape Town, South Africa. 
She served there as the scientifi c lead on Project SAGE (South African 
Guidelines Excellence), a Flagship grant from the South African Medical 
Research Council designing and testing new ways of producing and trans-
lating evidence eff ectively into primary care settings in South Africa. Dr. 
Grimmer is the former inaugural director of the International Centre for 
Allied Health Evidence (iCAHE), UniSA. She has been publishing peer-re-
viewed scientifi c articles since 1989 and has authored and co-authored 
more than 350 papers to date. Her scholarly work refl ects public health and interprofessional health quality 
and service delivery issues; evidence-based practice theory, practice, and implementation; discharge planning 
quality and aging in place; and adolescent spinal health. Dr. Grimmer has published eight invited book chap-
ters, conceptualized and edited two niche textbooks on evidence-based practice and clinical guidelines, and 
presented hundreds of conference presentations. She has established long-term, valued, and formal linkages 
with research institutions in South Africa, Tokyo, Manila, Hong Kong, California, and North Carolina. She was 
awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award in Allied Health in 2014 at the 10th Allied Health Conference in 
Malaysia. Th is award was conferred by the International Chief Allied Health Professionals Organisation. She 
has established Th e Sihlalo Outreach mission to create advantage out of disadvantage for young people through 
personal, societal, and professional training opportunities in Cape Town, South Africa.


===PAGE 4===
PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
Rural, Urban, and Global 
Community-Based Practice
M. Margaret Barth, PhD, MPH
Ronny A. Bell, PhD, MS
Karen Grimmer, PhD, MMedSci, CertHlthEc
Editors
Kyle L. Th ompson, DCN, RDN, LDN
Adam Hege, PhD, MPA, CHES
Associate Editors


===PAGE 5===
Copyright © 2021 Springer Publishing Company, LLC
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of Springer Publishing 
Company, LLC, or authorization through payment of the appropriate fees to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 978-646-8600, info@copyright.com or on the Web at www.
copyright.com.
Springer Publishing Company, LLC
11 West 42nd Street, New York, NY 10036
www.springerpub.com
connect.springerpub.com
Acquisitions Editor: David D’Addona
Compositor: Exeter Premedia Services Private Ltd.
ISBN: 978-0-8261-4684-7
ebook ISBN: 978-0-8261-4685-4
DOI: 10.1891/9780826146854
Qualifi ed instructors may request supplements by emailing textbook@springerpub.com
Instructor’s Manual: 978-0-8261-4686-1
Test Bank: 978-0-8261-4688-5
Image Bank: 978-0-8261-4687-8
Sample Syllabus: 978-0-8261-4689-2
PowerPoints: 978-0-8261-4687-2
20 21 22 23/ 5 4 3 2 1
Th e author and the publisher of this Work have made every eff ort to use sources believed to be reliable to provide infor-
mation that is accurate and compatible with the standards generally accepted at the time of publication. Th e author and 
publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from 
the readers’ use of, or reliance on, the information contained in this book. Th e publisher has no responsibility for the 
persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet websites referred to in this publication and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Barth, M. Margaret, editor. | Bell, Ronny A., editor. | 
   Grimmer-Somers, Karen, editor. | Th ompson, Kyle L., editor. | Hege, 
   Adam, editor.  
Title: Public health nutrition : rural, urban, and global community-based 
   practice / M. Margaret Barth, Ronny A. Bell, Karen Grimmer, editors; 
   Kyle L. Th ompson, Adam Hege, associate editors.  
Other titles: Public health nutrition (Barth)  
Description: New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company, LLC, [2020] | 
   Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifi ers: LCCN 2020000603 (print) | LCCN 2020000604 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9780826146847 (paperback) | ISBN 9780826146861 (instructor’s manual) | 
   ISBN 9780826146885 (test bank) | ISBN 9780826146878 (image bank) | ISBN 
   9780826146892 (sample syllabus) | ISBN 9780826146854 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9780826146872 (PowerPoints)  
Subjects: MESH: Diet, Healthy | Public Health | Community Health Services | 
   Global Health | Rural Population | Urban Population 
Classifi cation: LCC RA427.8  (print) | LCC RA427.8  (ebook) | NLM QT 235  | 
   DDC 362.1—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020000603
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020000604
Contact us to receive discount rates on bulk purchases. 
We can also customize our books to meet your needs.
For more information please contact: sales@springerpub.com
Publisher’s Note: New and used products purchased from third-party sellers are not guaranteed for quality, authen-
ticity, or access to any included digital components.
Printed in the United States of America.


===PAGE 6===
To the public health nutrition leaders of the future, that their 
eff orts would encourage and bless all those they serve.


===PAGE 8===
CONTENTS
Contributors  xv
Foreword Margaret Miller  xix
Preface  xxiii
PART I: FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition  3
Marsha Spence and Courtney Schand
Learning Objectives  3
Introduction  3
Global PHN  6
PHN: Defi nitions  9
PHN: Training and Workforce  10
PHN: Positions and Career Settings  11
PHN: Future Trends  13
Conclusion  14
Key Concepts  15
Case Study: A Public Health Nutritionist’s Process for Increasing Access to Healthful Foods 
in Urban and Rural Communities With Mobile Food Markets  15
Suggested Learning Activities  16
Refl ection Questions  17
Continue Your Learning Resources  17
Glossary  17
References  18
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles  23
Erin Bouldin, Karen Grimmer, and Ronny A. Bell
Learning Objectives  23
Introduction  23
Let Us Consider Public Health First  24
Let Us Now Consider Epidemiology as a Public Health Building Block  26
History of Epidemiology  27
Biostatistical Principles in Epidemiology  27
Study Types and Organization  31
Conclusion  38


===PAGE 9===
viii 
Contents
Key Concepts  38
Case Study: 56-Year-Old White Female Presents With Worsening Osteopenia  38
Suggested Learning Activities  39
Refl ection Questions  39
Continue Your Learning Resources  39
Glossary  40
References  40
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods  43
Erin Bouldin, Karen Grimmer, Jamie Griffi  n, M. Margaret Barth, and Ronny A. Bell
Learning Objectives  43
Introduction  43
Research Methods and Study Designs in Public Health Nutrition  44
Role of Epidemiology in Informing Evidence-Based Programs  50
Assessing Nutrition Status in Epidemiological Research  51
Basing Practice on Best Available Evidence (Whatever Th at Is)  53
Conclusion  61
Key Concepts  61
Case Study: Assessing Potential Factors of Increasing Prevalence of Asthma in Cameroon 
Th rough a Validated Food Frequency Questionnaire  62
Suggested Learning Activities  63
Refl ection Questions  64
Continue Your Learning Resources  64
Glossary  64
References  66
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition  69
Karen Chapman-Novakofski and Kristen N. DiFilippo
Learning Objectives  69
Introduction  69
Levels of Behavior Th eory  70
Behavior Th eories and Applications  71
Behavioral Economics  80
Issues in Behavioral Th eory Applications and Testing in Rural, Urban, and Global 
Communities  80
Conclusion  82
Key Concepts  82
Case Study 1: Improving Client Care Plans and Staff  Morale at a Community Health 
Center  83
Case Study 2: Developing Health and Wellness Programs for a Student Health 
Organization  83
Suggested Learning Activities  84
Refl ection Questions  84
Continue Your Learning Resources  84
Glossary  85
References  86


===PAGE 10===
 
Contents 
ix
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition  89
Lindsey Haynes-Maslow and Stephanie Bell Jilcott Pitts
Learning Objectives  89
Introduction  89
Federal Departments and Agencies Involved in U.S. Agriculture and Public Health 
Policy  90
Policy Development and Process Across Governmental Levels  93
Th e Child Nutrition Act  97
U.S. Agricultural Trade  97
Global Health and Agricultural Organizations  98
Understanding the Role of Public Health Policy in Infl uencing the Food 
Environment  98
Public Health Nutrition Policy and the Community Food Environment  99
Public Health Nutrition Policy and the Consumer Food Environment  100
Infl uencing Food Systems at the Community Level  103
Conclusion  103
Key Concepts  104
Case Study 1: Public Health Nutrition Educator: Increasing the Number of Local Farmers’ 
Markets  104
Case Study 2: Nonprofi t Th ink Tank: Educating Federal Policy-Makers About Local Fruit and 
Vegetable Production  104
Suggested Learning Activities  105
Refl ection Questions  105
Continue Your Learning Resources  106
Glossary  106
References  107
PART II: CULTURAL ASPECTS OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition  115
Carol Anne Hartwick-Pfl aum, John Coveney, David N. Cox, and Claude Fischler
Learning Objectives  115
Introduction  115
Context of Culture  117
Culture and Foodways   118
Traditional and Th erapeutic Uses of Foods in Rural, Urban, and Global Communities  118
Conclusion  122
Key Concepts  122
Case Study: Comparing the EPODE Program in France and the OPAL Program in 
Australia  122
Suggested Learning Activities  130
Refl ection Questions  131
Continue Your Learning Resources  131
Glossary  131
References  132


===PAGE 11===
x 
Contents
7. Promoting Nutritional Health, Healthy Food Systems, and Well-Being of the 
Community  135
Adam Hege, Alisha Farris, Amy Dailey, and Maria Julian
Learning Objectives  135
Introduction  135
Connection to National Initiatives (National to Local)  135
Promotion of Nutritional Health, Food Systems, and Community Well-Being Th rough 
Advocacy and Community Food Security Across Life Stages  140
Food and Social Justice  145
Optimizing Available Resources: Community Engagement and Resource Optimization  145
Systems Th inking for Eff ective Public Health Nutrition at the Community Level  149
Conclusion  152
Key Concepts  153
Case Study: Community Forums and Working Groups: Th e Community Engagement Project 
of McDowell County, North Carolina  153
Suggested Learning Activities  155
Refl ection Questions  155
Continue Your Learning Resources  156
Glossary  156
References  158
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach  163
Kyle L. Th ompson, Melissa Gutschall, and Dominique M. Rose
Learning Objectives  163
Introduction  163
What Is “Rural”?  164
Similarities and Diff erences Regarding the Rural Versus the Urban Health Environment  167
Common Nutrition-Impacted Health Conditions Associated With Rural Settings  172
Characteristics of Health Professionals Who Practice in Rural Settings  176
Cultural Competence in Rural Health Settings in the United States  179
Culturally Competent Public Health Nutrition Interventions in the Rural United States: 
An Interprofessional Approach  180
Continuing Your Learning  183
Conclusion  183
Key Concepts  183
Case Study: A Rural Food Pantry Client: Helping a Single Mother Increase the Nutritional 
Quality of Meals Prepared at Home  185
Suggested Learning Activities  187
Refl ection Questions  188
Continue Your Learning Resources  188
Glossary  189
Acknowledgments  193
References  193
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban 
Settings  199
Arelis Moore de Peralta, Michelle Eichinger, and Leslie Hossfeld
Learning Objectives  199


===PAGE 12===
 
Contents 
xi
Introduction  199
Socio-Ecological Approaches to Healthier Nutrition in Urban Settings  206
Strategies to Improve the Urban Food Environment  211
Conclusion  214
Key Concepts  215
Case Study 1: LiveWell Greenville: Maintaining a Healthy Community in Greenville County, 
South Carolina  216
Case Study 2: Programs and Collaboratives for Improving Aff ordable Healthy Food Access 
in San Diego County, California  219
Suggested Learning Activities  219
Refl ection Questions  220
Continue Your Learning Resources  220
Glossary  221
References  222
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach  227
Lauren R. Sastre, Jigna M. Dharod, and Danielle L. Nunnery
Learning Objectives  227
Introduction  227
Global Nutrition and Nutrition Security  228
Global Nutrition Risks to Health Status Across the Life Span  232
Eff ects of Food Insecurity During the First 1,000 Days of Life  234
U.S. Migration: Garnering an Understanding of the Experiences, Context, Acculturation 
Process, and Risks Associated With Migration  237
Putting It All Together: Best Practices for PHN Professionals Working With Diverse 
Audiences  240
Conclusion  245
Key Concepts  246
Case Study: Health Literacy and Resettled Refugees: Dr. Lauren Sastre on Her Research 
With Burmese Refugees  246
Suggested Learning Activities  248
Refl ection Questions  248
Continue Your Learning Resources  249
Glossary  250
References  252
PART III: COMMUNITY ASSESSMENT, PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, 
AND EVALUATION
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition  259
Becky Adams and Karen L. Probert
Learning Objectives  259
Introduction  259
Conducting Community-Based Needs Assessments and Environmental Scans  260
Community Health Assessment Models  263
Methods for Data Collection and Challenges  265
Basic Needs Assessment: Developing a Plan for the Target Population  269


===PAGE 13===
xii 
Contents
Skills in Assessment of Communities  269
Building Sustained Stakeholder Relationships and Engagement  270
Conclusion  274
Key Concepts  274
Case Study 1: Woodruff  County, Arkansas, Case Study on Community Assessment  276
Case Study 2: McCrory Local Foods, Local Places Assessment  278
Suggested Learning Activities  279
Refl ection Questions  280
Continue Your Learning Resources  281
Glossary  281
References  282
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning  285
Karen L. Probert and Becky Adams
Learning Objectives  285
Introduction  285
Fundamentals of Public Health Nutrition Program Design, Planning, and 
Management  286
Review of Community Assessment Results  286
Evidence-Based Programs in Program Planning  289
Terminology  291
History and Evolution of Terms and Defi nitions  291
Evidence-Based Public Health  291
Evidence-Informed Programs  292
Best Practice  294
Value of Evidence-Informed Programs  294
Concern Regarding Focus on Evidence  294
Conclusion  305
Key Concepts  305
Case Study: Th e Howard County Hometown Health Improvement Coalition: 
Improving Nutrition and Increasing Access to Healthy Foods in Howard County, 
Arkansas  307
Suggested Learning Activities  312
Refl ection Questions  313
Continue Your Learning Resources  313
Glossary  315
References  315
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation  319
Jessica Soldavini, Caitlin Hildebrand, and Alice Ammerman
Learning Objectives  319
Introduction  319
Implementation and Evaluation of Food and Nutrition Interventions  319
Evaluation Methods and Best Practices  324
Invention and Reinvention of Approaches Based on Health Outcomes  327
Communication Strategies  332
mHealth Applications and Nutrition Monitoring  334


===PAGE 14===
 
Contents 
xiii
Conclusion  335
Key Concepts  336
Case Study: A Farm-to-School Program in the Happy Valley School District  336
Suggested Learning Activities  337
Refl ection Questions  337
Continue Your Learning Resources  338
Glossary  338
References  339
PART IV: CURRENT AND FUTURE CHALLENGES IN PUBLIC HEALTH 
NUTRITION AND SUSTAINABILITY
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges  343
Amanda S. Hege, Kendra Oo, and Joanna Cummings
Learning Objectives  343
Introduction  343
Nutrition and Health-Related Disease Trends  344
Maternal, Infant, and Child Health  351
Health Promotion for Young Adults, Specifi cally College and University Students  354
Nutritional Needs and Health Conditions While Aging  359
Malnutrition, Food Insecurity, and Hunger and Implications for Health  364
Conclusion  371
Key Concepts  371
Case Study: Challenges Faced by Single Mother of Th ree  372
Suggested Learning Activities  373
Refl ection Questions  375
Continue Your Learning Resources  375
Glossary  376
References  377
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition  385
Kyle L. Th ompson and Olivia Anderson
Learning Objectives  385
Introduction  385
Th e Importance of Continuous Professional Development  386
Strategies and Methods of Professional Development  387
Engagement in Professional Organizations to Promote Professional Development  395
Skills for Eff ective Grantsmanship in PHN  396
Conclusion  404
Key Concepts  404
Case Study 1: Professional Development: Setting Goals for a Community Nutrition and 
Wellness Educator Seeking to Move Into Management and Directorship  405
Case Study 2: Grantsmanship: Nutrition Educator Applying for a Grant to Teach Cooking 
Skills Classes in the Community  405
Suggested Learning Activities  406
Refl ection Questions  407
Continue Your Learning Resources  407


===PAGE 15===
xiv 
Contents
Glossary  408
References  410
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition  413
Sonya Jones and Dennis Lanigan
Learning Objectives  413
Introduction  413
Defi ning Sustainability for Public Health and Nutrition  414
How We Respond to the Interrelated Crises  421
Summary Statements on Food and Sustainability  425
Future Directions  434
Conclusion  435
Key Concepts  435
Case Study 1: A Crisis of Community Governance in the Food System in South 
Carolina  436
Case Study 2: Rwanda’s Agricultural and Environmental Strategies  436
Suggested Learning Activities  437
Refl ection Questions  438
Continue Your Learning Resources  438
Glossary  438
References  440
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities  443
Gizem Templeton, Nihal Destan Aytekin Hatik, and Hilary A. Campbell
Learning Objectives  443
Introduction  443
Global Health Trends  443
Food Systems and Environmental Health  445
Innovative Technologies and Communication Strategies  449
Food Policy Hurdles and Barriers  450
Achieving Food Equity  451
Conclusion  452
Key Concepts  452
Case Study 1: Food Sovereignty in Urban United States: An Urban Farming Community in 
South Central Los Angeles  453
Case Study 2: Vitamin A Sweet Potato in Uganda: Biofortifi cation Enhancing Nutrition for 
Vulnerable Populations  453
Suggested Learning Activities  455
Refl ection Questions  455
Continue Your Learning Resources  455
Glossary  455
References  457
Appendix: Websites With Evidence-Informed Programs to Improve Diet and Exercise Behaviors 
of Communities  461
Karen L. Probert and Becky Adams
Index  465


===PAGE 16===
CONTRIBUTORS
Becky Adams, DrPH, RD, CDE, Director, Partnership and Policy Support/Section Chief, 
Nutrition and Physical Activity, Association of State Public Health Nutritionists, Little Rock, 
Arkansas
Alice Ammerman, DrPH, Mildred Kaufman Distinguished Professor, Department of Nutrition, 
Gillings School of Global Public Health and Director, Center for Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Olivia Anderson, PhD, RD, Clinical Assistant Professor, Department of Nutritional Sciences, 
School of Public Health, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
M. Margaret Barth, PhD, MPH, Professor and Chair, Department of Nutrition and Health 
Care Management, Appalachian State University, Boone, North Carolina
Ronny A. Bell, PhD, MS, Professor and Chair, Department of Public Health, East Carolina 
University, Greenville, North Carolina
Erin Bouldin, PhD, Assistant Professor, Department of Health and Exercise Science, 
Appalachian State University, Boone, North Carolina
Hilary A. Campbell, PharmD, JD, Research Associate, Margolis Center for Health Policy, 
Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
Karen Chapman-Novakofski, PhD, RDN, Professor, Department of Food Science and Human 
Nutrition, College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois 
at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, Illinois
John Coveney, PhD, Professor, Global Food, Culture and Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, 
South Australia
David N. Cox, PhD, Principal Research Scientist, CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Adelaide, 
South Australia
Joanna Cummings, MS, RD, CNSC, Director, OHSU-Lao Nutrition Education and Research 
Partnership, Instructor, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon


===PAGE 17===
xvi 
Contributors
Amy Dailey, PhD, MPH, Associate Professor, Department of Health Sciences, Director of 
Community Based Learning and Research, Gettysburg College, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania
Arelis Moore de Peralta, MD, PhD, MPH, MEd, Assistant Professor of Community Health, 
Department of Languages, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina
Jigna M. Dharod, PhD, Associate Professor, Director of Graduate Studies, Department of 
Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina
Kristen N. DiFilippo, PhD, RDN, Teaching Assistant Professor, Department of Kinesiology 
and Community Health, College of Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Champaign, Illinois
Michelle Eichinger, MS, MPA, Doctoral Student, Department of Planning, Design and the Built 
Environment, Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina
Alisha Farris, PhD, RD, CSP, Assistant Professor of Nutrition, Department of Nutrition and 
Health Care Management, Beaver College of Health Sciences, Appalachian State University, 
Boone, North Carolina
Claude Fischler, PhD, Directeur de recherche CNRS emeritus, IIAC, Ecole des Hautes Etudes 
en Sciences Sociales, Paris, France
Jamie Griffi  n, PhD, RD, Assistant Professor, Department of Nutrition, Appalachian State 
University, Boone, North Carolina
Karen Grimmer, PhD, MMedSci, CertHlthEc, Former Director, Center for Allied Health 
Evidence, University of Flinders, Adelaide, South Australia; Professor Extraordinaire, 
Faculty of Medical and Health Science, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; 
Senior Researcher, College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders University, Adelaide, 
South Australia; Adjunct Professor, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santo Tomas, Manila, 
Philippines
Melissa Gutschall, PhD, RD, LDN, Associate Professor and Director, Appalachian State 
University Graduate Program in Nutrition, Department of Nutrition and Health Care 
Management, Beaver College of Health Sciences, Appalachian State University, Boone, 
North Carolina
Carol Anne Hartwick-Pfl aum, PhD, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia
Nihal Destan Aytekin Hatik, MSc, Knowledge Management Specialist, HarvestPlus, 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, District of Columbia
Lindsey Haynes-Maslow, PhD, MHA, Assistant Professor and Extension Specialist, Department 
of Agricultural and Human Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina


===PAGE 18===
 
Contributors 
xvii
Adam Hege, PhD, MPA, CHES, Assistant Professor and Public Health Program Director, 
Department of Health and Exercise Science, Beaver College of Health Sciences, Appalachian 
State University, Boone, North Carolina
Amanda S. Hege, MPH, RDN, LD, Sustainable Food Systems Project Manager, Academy 
of Nutrition and Dietetics Foundation, Chicago, Illinois; Former Director of Community 
Outreach, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
Caitlin Hildebrand, MD, MPH, Graduate Research Assistant, UNC Center for Health 
Promotion and Disease Prevention and Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Leslie Hossfeld, PhD, Dean, College of Behavioral, Social and Health Sciences, 
Clemson University, Clemson, South Carolina
Sonya Jones, PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Health Promotion, Education and 
Behavior, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina
Maria Julian, MPA, Director of Community Health Services, Appalachian District Health 
Department, AppHealthCare, Boone, North Carolina
Dennis Lanigan, Organic Farmer, Hendersonville, North Carolina
Danielle L. Nunnery, PhD, RDN, LDN, Assistant Professor, Department of Nutrition and 
Health Care Management, Leon Levine Hall of Health Sciences, Appalachian State University, 
Boone, North Carolina
Kendra Oo, MS, RD, LD, Director of Community Outreach, Department of Dietetics and 
Human Nutrition, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
Stephanie Bell Jilcott Pitts, PhD, Professor, Department of Public Health, East Carolina 
University, Greenville, North Carolina
Karen L. Probert, MS, RDN, Executive Director, Association of State Public Health 
Nutritionists, Tucson, Arizona
Dominique M. Rose, PhD, MPH, Program Manager, Department of Population and 
Quantitative Health Sciences, Mary Ann Swetland Center for Environmental Health, 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
Lauren R. Sastre, PhD, RDN, LDN, Assistant Professor, Department of Nutrition Science, 
East Carolina University, Health Sciences Building, Greenville, North Carolina
Courtney Schand, MS, RDN, LDN, Owner, Registered Dietitian, CS Nutrition, Nashville, 
Tennessee


===PAGE 19===
xviii 
Contributors
Jessica Soldavini, MPH, RD, LDN, Graduate Research Assistant, UNC Center for Health 
Promotion and Disease Prevention and Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Marsha Spence, PhD, MPH, RDN, LDN, Associate Professor of Practice, Director, Public 
Health Nutrition Graduate Program, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee
Gizem Templeton, PhD, Associate in Research, World Food Policy Center, Sanford School of 
Public Policy, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina
Kyle L. Th ompson, DCN, RDN, LDN, Assistant Professor of Nutrition, Coordinator, 
Appalachian State University Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition, Department of 
Nutrition and Health Care Management, Beaver College of Health Sciences, Appalachian State 
University, Boone, North Carolina


===PAGE 20===
FOREWORD
Public health nutrition is concerned with promoting and maintaining the nutritional health of 
populations. While grounded in nutritional science, the practice of public health nutrition must 
take a public health approach that considers the cultural, political, economic, and environmen-
tal infl uences on how local, national, and global communities access and use food for optimum 
nutrition. Food security, which is defi ned by sustainable access to adequate, safe, and nutritious 
food that meets individual dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, is 
a fundamental human right that must underpin the mission of public health nutrition. Today, 
nearly one in 10 persons globally is food insecure, one in three suff ers from at least one form 
of malnutrition—undernutrition, micronutrient defi ciency, overweight or obesity—and diet-re-
lated noncommunicable diseases are endemic. Th e root causes of and factors contributing to food 
insecurity and malnutrition are complex and multidimensional. To address these, public health 
nutritionists must work in partnership with those committed to an equitable, evidence-based 
approach to the prevention of problems at their source. Th is requires empowerment of those 
aff ected and advocacy and action to encourage policy-makers and decision-takers, at all levels 
from global to local, to create social, economic, and physical environments that support healthy 
food security.
Th e public health nutrition workforce brings a critical set of nutrition competencies to the 
planning and delivery of what is otherwise a public health approach to preventing food insecurity, 
hunger, diet-related ill health, and disease. Th e competent public health nutritionist can apply 
nutrition science, epidemiology, and systems theory to help to identify the nature and deter-
minants of healthy and unhealthy diets and food security. Th ey can identify the interactions of 
food with biological, cultural, social, and environmental systems, and will advocate for upstream 
level interventions, recognizing the importance of policies and food systems in shaping access to 
sustainable healthy foods. Th ey can apply behavioral and implementation sciences skills in the 
design and implementation of nutrition education strategies, both for community members and 
other professionals, for prevention and management of undernutrition and diet-related chronic 
diseases. Th e public health nutrition workforce can therefore function at many levels, contrib-
uting to advocacy and policy decisions in many sectors such as health, agriculture, education, 
social services, business, and others; capacity development of other professionals in these sec-
tors; education, skills development, and empowerment of community members; and research and 
evaluation to identify eff ective actions and best practice. A fully competent workforce working 
across the dimensions of public health nutrition is essential to improve global food systems and 
nutrition for better health. Now more than ever the public health nutrition fi eld must embrace 
the interdisciplinary nature of its mission and work upstream of immediate nutrition problems. 
Public health nutrition is at the crossroads of food supply, health, and education systems, but 


===PAGE 21===
xx 
Foreword
it also has social, economic, and political dimensions. Inequity and inequality leading to food 
insecurity and malnutrition are perpetuated by social, cultural, political, and economic policy 
decisions.
Zero hunger and good health and well-being are two of the 17 United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals for 2030, but 10 others address indicators highly relevant to nutrition. Th e 
most pressing of these relate to reducing poverty, inequity, and inequality; increasing access to 
education, productive work, and health services; improving sanitation and access to clean water 
and addressing displacement due to changes in land ownership and use, confl ict, and natural 
disasters. Pressures are also growing from new and emerging challenges and trends such as cli-
mate change, population growth, urbanization, changing lifestyles, and changing food systems. 
Much of the work to eliminate hunger and improve health and well-being will need to be done 
to address determinants defi ned by goals in other sectors. Public health nutritionists have a lead-
ership role to infl uence policies and practices impacting nutrition in each sector as well as to 
motivate and train in nutrition those whose work will impact nutrition. Engagement with com-
munities and individuals aff ected is also critical. Public health nutritionists must support com-
munities to engage in self-identifi ed and self-selected actions, thus achieving more self-reliance, 
empowerment, and sustainability. Th e public health nutrition fi eld needs well-trained and sup-
ported nutrition professionals able to advocate at local, national, and international levels to pro-
mote our purpose. We need to collaborate and work collectively toward common goals with many 
diff erent groups and organizations. Th is work must follow ethical principles, including those of 
transparency, equity, respect, and unconfl icted interest. It must also acknowledge that food secu-
rity and good health are basic human rights. As its unique contribution, the profession must con-
tinue to provide leadership and scholarship to strengthen the evidence base for eff ective action to 
improve nutrition-related health, particularly in the worst off  and most disadvantaged commu-
nities in the world. Refl ective practice and commitment to evaluation of our work are needed to 
learn lessons about what has and has not worked. Armed with this evidence, we must step up and 
show leadership in advocating for evidence-based policies and actions to improve nutrition. Part 
of this role is also to develop the capacity of other health professionals, community members, and 
policy-makers to understand the need for and how to achieve healthy sustainable diets. 
As professionals, public health nutritionists need to be trained, mentored, and supported 
throughout their careers. Th is begins with an understanding and consensus on the competencies, 
or combination of knowledge, skills, and attitudes, required to eff ectively perform public health 
nutrition work. Curriculum and learning and teaching methods should then be developed based 
on the competencies. Th is will ensure relevant workforce preparation and training to perform 
eff ectively in the workplace. Curricula for courses need to be revised to match local circumstances, 
and there is a need for work-based experience and mentoring to help students develop their skills 
and learn refl ective practice. Ongoing structured professional learning is also critical to maintain-
ing competence of the workforce relevant to contemporary issues and needs. To achieve all of this 
requires high-level support, proper manpower planning, and a strong professional structure to 
set and help maintain standards.Th is text recognizes the importance of building and sustaining a 
professional workforce of public health nutrition leaders. It provides the foundations for building 
the competencies needed by public health nutritionists to recognize and address contemporary 
public health nutrition challenges.
It is not a text that dwells on the facts of nutrition sciences but instead explores the means 
through which such facts can be interpreted, applied, and evaluated for impact at population and 
community levels. It leads the reader to understand that food supply systems and cultural, social, 
political, and economic factors are key determinants of sustainable individual and community 


===PAGE 22===
 
Foreword 
xxi
access to nutritious food. It emphasizes the critical importance of consulting with communities 
to identify their needs and opportunities for change, while working with them and across sectors 
to ensure that key determinants at systems levels are also addressed to support sustainable change.
Th roughout the text, information, models, processes, examples, and practice activities are pro-
vided to help readers develop the understanding and skills needed for eff ective work in the fi eld. 
While many of the examples are in the context of the United States, they remain useful in other 
settings to illustrate key concepts and to provide a focus for comparative discussion.
Margaret Miller
President
World Public Health Nutrition Association


===PAGE 24===
PREFACE
Our team began our work as an exploration to identify an introductory text for the latest in-depth, 
evidence-based training of future public health nutrition professionals and leaders regionally, 
nationally, and internationally. In the process, our eff orts turned into an incredible journey of 
working with some of the most outstanding professionals, mentors, and experts in the fi eld of 
public health nutrition. 
Th e overall goal of this text is to support the missions of various outstanding organizations 
devoted to the growing fi eld of public health nutrition to promote optimal health and well-being of 
communities and populations through nutrition-related services, program planning, interventions, 
and policy, environmental, and systems change. Th ese include the Association of State Public Health 
Nutritionists (ASPHN), the World Public Health Nutrition Association (WPHNA), the Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics (AND), the Food and Nutrition working group of the American Public Health 
Association (APHA), the Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition (AGPPHN), 
and the Southeastern University Consortium on Hunger, Poverty and Nutrition, among others. 
Some commonalities of the missions of these organizations include the following:
 
■
To provide advanced training in nutrition and public health to develop in-depth 
knowledge of the latest nutrition-related evidence base, competencies and skills related 
to the core public health functions, and essential services of public health and public 
health nutrition
 
■
To strengthen nutrition policy, programs, and environments for all people through the 
development of culturally competent public health nutrition leaders and collaborative 
interprofessional advocacy of practitioners nationwide and globally
 
■
To build workforce capacity over the next several decades to meet the desperate need 
for public health nutrition professionals and practitioners to address the social determi-
nants of health and serve growing population needs in rural, urban, and global settings
Th e text is organized into four main parts with content highlights as follows:
 
■
Part I: Foundations of Public Health Nutrition includes history and principles of public 
health nutrition, introduction to nutritional epidemiology, behavioral aspects of public 
health nutrition, and an overview of food policy.
 
■
Part II: Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition includes cultural aspects of nutri-
tion, health promotion within communities, and a focus on interprofessional practice 
in rural, urban, and global public health nutrition settings. 
 
■
Part III: Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation includes 
methods of community nutrition assessment, program planning, and public health 
nutrition intervention delivery and evaluation. 


===PAGE 25===
xxiv 
Preface
 
■
Part IV: Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability 
includes current nutrition-related health issues, professional development needs and 
strategies, sustainability concerns, food systems and environmental health trends, and 
opportunities.
Each chapter provides learning objectives, key concepts, a glossary of terms, and a variety of 
learning resources including case studies, refl ective questions, suggestions for learning activities, 
and resources for further study.
It is the sincere hope of the editors and authors that this text will be an eff ective tool for train-
ing and inspiring future public health nutrition professionals to engage in transformative prac-
tice everywhere in the world to nourish the physical, emotional, and spiritual dimensions of all 
human beings.
Th e editors of this text would like to acknowledge each of the authors and the editorial leader-
ship team at Springer Publishing Company. Please accept our sincere thanks and appreciation for 
your valued contributions.
M. Margaret Barth, PhD, MPH
Ronny A. Bell, PhD, MS
Karen Grimmer, PhD, MMedSci, CertHlthEc
Qualifi ed instructors may obtain access to supplementary material (Instructor’s Manual, Test 
Bank, PowerPoints, Image Bank, and Syllabus) by emailing textbook@springerpub.com.


===PAGE 26===
I
FOUNDATIONS OF PUBLIC 
HEALTH NUTRITION


===PAGE 28===
1
INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC 
HEALTH NUTRITION
MARSHA SPENCE AND COURTNEY SCHAND
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Provide the defi nition of public health nutrition (PHN) given by the Academy of Nutrition 
and Dietetics Public Health Nutrition Task Force in 2012.
2. Explain fi ve key roles of a public health nutritionist within a public health agency.
3. Describe the Social-Ecological Model and how it can be used by public health nutrition-
ists to understand the multiple levels of infl uence on nutrition- and other health-related 
behaviors.
4. Describe the core functions of public health including assessment, assurance, and policy 
development.
5. List the 10 essential public health services and 16 essential public health nutrition services 
that support these core functions.
6. Describe essential areas of training for public health nutritionists, including advanced 
training in nutrition and public health, knowledge of current nutrition-related evi-
dence-based skills, and the core functions of public health.
INTRODUCTION
History of PHN in the United States
Mary Egan,1 a leader in shaping contemporary PHN education and practice in the United States, 
delineated the history of PHN with major milestones that infl uenced its development from the 
mid-1800s to the mid-1990s. During the mid-1800s, which was described as the “great sanitary 
awakening,”2 the modern public health system (Figure 1.1)3 began with a focus on sanitation 
eff orts to decrease the spread of communicable diseases.4 At this time, PHN was in its infancy 
with origins in home economics and public health and a focus on food safety and meal prepara-
tion on a budget. In the early 1900s, morbidity and mortality rates were high, especially among 
the working poor, infants, children, and mothers. In 1906, the Food and Drug Act was passed by 
Congress to begin oversight of food production, sales, and labeling.4 In 1909, under the leadership 
of President Th eodore Roosevelt, the White House held its fi rst conference, the White House 
Conference on the Care of Dependent Children.5 Because of this conference, the Children’s 


===PAGE 29===
4 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Bureau was created, which in eff ect launched the fi eld of PHN.1 Th e Sheppard–Towner Act in 
1921 and the Social Security Act in 1935 had profound infl uences on public health infrastructure 
and the subsequent growth of PHN. Funds available to state health departments for maternal 
and child health through Title V of the Social Security Act stimulated rapid growth in the fi eld. 
Prior to 1935, only three public health nutritionists were employed in three states, but by 1939, 
39 public health nutritionists were employed in 24 states. In 1938, public health nutritionists’ 
qualifi cations were fi rst delineated. Th e Social Security Act was amended in 1939, and funds were 
available to train public health nutritionists. In 1942, based in part on nutrition studies conducted 
by the Public Health Service, nutrition clinics were developed in some state and local public 
health agencies. By the mid-1940s, 45 of the 48 states employed one or more PHN consultants, 
and funding to train graduate students in PHN and provide continuing education for practicing 
PHN professionals was allocated.1
During the 1950s, growth of the profession became more organized with the establishment 
of the Association of Faculties of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition (currently, the 
Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition)6 in 1950 and the Association 
of State and Territorial Public Health Nutrition Directors (currently, the Association of State 
Public Health Nutritionists) in 1952. In the mid-1960s, legislation passed to reduce poverty 
in the United States provided funding for projects like the Maternity and Infant Care Program, 
the Compressive Health Projects for Children and Youth, Head Start, and the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs. Th ese programs opened many more positions for public health nutritionists 
FIGURE 1.1 The modern public health system in the United States.
CHC, community health center; EMS, emergency medical services.
Source: From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Public Health System. 2018, June. https://www.cdc
.gov/publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html
EMS
Civic
groups
Nursing
homes
Fire
Elected
officials
Faith
Institutions
Public health
agency
Transit
Community
centers
Employers
Corrections
Law
enforcement
Doctors
Schools
Mental
health
Tribal
health
CHCs
Hospitals
Drug
treatment
Neighborhood
organizations
Nonprofit
organizations
Home
health
Laboratories


===PAGE 30===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
5
as practitioners in the programs or as consultants. Th e 1969 White House Conference on Food, 
Nutrition, and Health suggested actions to reduce malnutrition and hunger.7 One of the rec-
ommendations was to provide nutrition services to pregnant women, infants, and young chil-
dren from impoverished households. In 1972, the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) began as a pilot program, and in 1975, it was funded as a 
permanent nutrition education and supplemental food program.8 To assess the nutrition status of 
the population, the Children’s Bureau and the Public Health Service began collecting data in the 
late 1960s and early 1970s via the Study of Nutritional Status of Preschool Children in the United 
States,9 the Ten State Survey, 1968-1970,10 and the National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey, 1971-1975.11 Th ese programs and studies expanded positions and the scope of practice of 
public health nutritionists.1
In the 1970s and 1980s, several landmark documents were released that focused on the impor-
tance of nutrition in the prevention of chronic diseases and to provide dietary guidance for the 
U.S. population. First, in 1977, the Dietary Goals for the United States12 were released, followed 
by Healthy People: Th e Surgeon General’s Report on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 
in 1979,13 which outlined the fi rst set of national health goals and objectives that focused on 
health promotion and disease prevention and highlighted the role of nutrition in these areas. Th e 
next year, two important documents were released. First, Promoting Health/Preventing Disease: 
Objectives for the Nation was released13 and included 226 health-related objectives and action 
steps for improving population health over the next decade. Th ese documents were the forerun-
ners for the Healthy People series of documents,14 which are science-based health objectives for 
the U.S. population that are released every 10 years. Th e second landmark document released that 
year was Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for Americans.15 Th is was the fi rst edi-
tion of dietary guidance for the U.S. population that focused on healthful dietary patterns based 
on the most accurate scientifi c evidence at the time.16
During the past two decades of the 1900s, as scientifi c understanding of chronic diseases and 
their relationship to nutrition continued to develop, public health nutritionists began working 
across the life course in the areas of health promotion and disease prevention. Th e Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) established the National Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion in 1988 and expanded the roles of public health nutritionists 
at the federal level working with states and other agencies to decrease chronic disease.17 Also, in 
1988, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) released a groundbreaking document, Th e Future of Public 
Health.4,18 Th is document outlined the three core functions of public health—assessment, policy 
development, and assurance—and the 10 essential services of public health (Figure 1.2).19 In 1996, 
the book, Moving to the Future: Developing Community-Based Nutrition Services20 delineated 
the essential PHN services, which are still relevant today based on a recent article that defi ned a 
similar list of core functions of the PHN workforce in Australia.21 Table 1.1 delineates the essential 
PHN services, as outlined by Probert, in relationship to the core functions of public health.
Th e Healthy People14 series of national health objectives began with Healthy People 2000,22 
released September 1990. Since the introduction of these national health objectives, major prog-
ress has been made in the reduction of preventable illness and death, including nutrition-re-
lated diseases, cardiovascular disease, and cancer, along with risk factors such as hypertension 
and hyperlipidemia.23 However, there is much work to be done still. Two nutrition-related lead-
ing health indicators, “reduce the proportion of adults who are obese” and “reduce the propor-
tion of children and adolescents aged 2 to 19 years who are considered obese,” have not met the 
2020 targets and have actually increased from 33.9% to 38.6% and 16.1% to 17.8%, respectively. 
Healthy People 2020 objectives related to dietary intake need improvement as well. Although 


===PAGE 31===
6 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
FIGURE 1.2 The 10 essential public health services.
Source: From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The 10 Essential Public Health Services. 2018, June. 
https://www.cdc.gov/publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html
A
S
S
E
S
S
M
E
NT
P
OL
IC
Y 
D
E
V
EL
O
P
M
E
N
T
AS
S
U
RA
N
C
E
Monitor
Monitor
health
health
  Diagnose
  Diagnose
and investigate
and investigate
  Inform,
  Inform,
Educate,
Educate,
Empower
Empower
  Develop
  Develop
policies
policies
  Enforce
  Enforce
laws
laws
  Link
  Link
to / Provide
to / Provide
care
care
  Assure
  Assure
competent
competent
workforce
workforce
  Evaluate
  Evaluate
  Research
  Research
     Mobilize
     Mobilize
            community
            community
                partnerships
                partnerships
Monitor
health
  Diagnose
and investigate
  Inform,
Educate,
Empower
  Develop
policies
  Enforce
laws
  Link
to / Provide
care
  Assure
competent
workforce
  Evaluate
  Research
     Mobilize
            community
                partnerships
S
y
s
t
e
m
 
M
a
n
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
these objectives have improved from baseline, National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES) data show that for the U.S. population, the mean daily intake of vegetables 
is still below the national objective of 1.6 cup equivalents per 1,000 calories (age-adjusted) and 
mean percentage of total daily calorie intake from added sugars (age-adjusted) and mean daily 
sodium intake (age-adjusted) are above the objectives of 9.7% and 2,300 mg, respectively. Healthy 
People 2030,24 the newest edition of the Healthy People series, has seven foundation principles, 
fi ve overarching goals, and eight action areas (Box 1.1). With a continued focus on prevention of 
chronic diseases, public health nutritionists will continue to play vital roles in improving popu-
lation health.
GLOBAL PHN
Global PHN practice and services are much more recent concepts than PHN practice and ser-
vices in developed nations. Like the United States, developed, transitioning, and developing 
countries have their own unique histories related to the foundations of public health and, sub-
sequently, the growth of PHN. From the mid-1990s until now, international dietary intake pat-
terns and physical activity levels and sedentary behaviors changed rapidly as a result of greater 
industrialization, changes in the world food economy, technology, and globalization.25 Because 
of these dietary intake and activity changes, there was an ensuing increase in nutrition-related 
chronic diseases; poorer communities, especially in developing and newly developed countries, 
experience a disproportionate burden of morbidity and mortality from chronic diseases such 


===PAGE 32===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
7
TABLE 1.1 PUBLIC HEALTH CORE FUNCTIONS AND ESSENTIAL PUBLIC HEALTH 
NUTRITION SERVICES
PUBLIC HEALTH 
CORE FUNCTION(S)
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION SERVICES
Assessment
Assessing the nutritional status of specifi c populations or geographic areas
Identifying priority populations that may be at nutritional risk
Initiating and participating in nutrition data collection
Policy development
Providing leadership in the development of and planning for health and 
nutrition policies
Raising awareness among key policy-makers on the potential impact of 
nutrition and food regulations on budget decisions on the health of the 
community
Acting as an advocate for priority populations on food and nutrition issues
Assurance
Planning for nutrition services in conjunction with other health services, 
based on information obtained from an adequate and ongoing database 
focused on health outcomes
Recommending and providing specifi c training and programs to meet 
identifi ed nutrition needs
Identifying or assisting in development of accurate, up-to-date nutrition 
education materials
Ensuring the availability of quality nutrition services to priority populations, 
including nutrition screening, assessment, education, counseling, and refer-
ral for food assistance and follow-up
Providing community health promotion and disease prevention activities 
that are population-based
Providing quality assurance guidelines for practitioners dealing with food 
and nutrition issues
Facilitating coordination with other providers of health and nutrition ser-
vices within the community
Assessment/
Assurance/
Policy development
Participating in nutrition research, demonstration, and evaluation projects 
Providing expert nutrition consultation to the community
Evaluating the impact of the health status of populations who receive public 
health nutrition services
Sources: From Probert K. Moving to the Future: Developing Community-Based Nutrition Services. Washington, DC: 
Association of State and Territorial Public Health Nutrition Directors; 1996; Institute of Medicine Committee for the Study 
of the Future of Public Health. The Future of Public Health. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1988. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK218224
as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer.26 Like most offi  cial health agencies, the World 
Health Organization (WHO), created in 1948 as part of the United Nations, was formed to 
combat communicable diseases and to improve maternal, infant, and child health and nutrition.27 
Now, WHO is the most prominent health agency in the world and assists public health agencies 
around the globe in responding to both communicable and noncommunicable diseases.


===PAGE 33===
8 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
BOX 1.1
HEALTHY PEOPLE 2030 FOUNDATION PRINCIPLES, OVERARCHING GOALS, 
AND PLAN OF ACTION
Foundational Principles
 
■
Health and well-being of all people and communities are essential to a thriving, equitable 
society.
 
■
Promoting health and well-being and preventing disease are linked efforts that encompass 
physical, mental, and social health dimensions.
 
■
Investing to achieve the full potential for health and well-being for all provides valuable beneﬁ ts 
to society.
 
■
Achieving health and well-being requires eliminating health disparities, achieving health equity, 
and attaining health literacy.
 
■
Healthy physical, social, and economic environments strengthen the potential to achieve health 
and well-being.
 
■
Promoting and achieving the nation’s health and well-being is a shared responsibility that is 
distributed across the national, state, tribal, and community levels, including the public, private, 
and not-for-proﬁ t sectors.
 
■
Working to attain the full potential for health and well-being of the population is a component of 
decision-making and policy formulation across all sectors.
Overarching Goals
 
■
Attain healthy, thriving lives and well-being, free of preventable disease, disability, injury, and 
premature death.
 
■
Eliminate health disparities, achieve health equity, and attain health literacy to improve the 
health and well-being of all.
 
■
Create social, physical, and economic environments that promote attaining full potential for 
health and well-being for all.
 
■
Promote healthy development, healthy behaviors, and well-being across all life stages.
 
■
Engage leadership, key constituents, and the public across multiple sectors to take action and 
design policies that improve the health and well-being of all.
Plan of Action
 
■
Set national goals and measurable objectives to guide evidence-based policies, programs, and 
other actions to improve health and well-being.
 
■
Provide data that is accurate, timely, accessible, and can drive targeted actions to address 
regions and populations with poor health or at high risk for poor health in the future.
 
■
Foster impact through public and private efforts to improve health and well-being for people of 
all ages and the communities in which they live.
 
■
Provide tools for the public, programs, policy-makers, and others to evaluate progress toward 
improving health and well-being.
(continued )


===PAGE 34===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
9
PHN: DEFINITIONS
Several organizations have made eff orts to defi ne PHN and public health nutritionist for the 
past several decades.28–32 PHN professionals and academicians in the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Australia, and Canada, as well as other countries in the European Union, have worked 
separately and together to develop working defi nitions of PHN. One of the fi rst formal defi ni-
tions of public health nutritionist in the United States was provided by Margaret Kaufmann in 
Personnel in Public Health Nutrition in the 1980s as
that member of the public health agency staff  who is responsible for assessing community 
nutrition needs and planning, organizing, managing, directing, coordinating, and evalu-
ating the nutrition component of the health agency’s services . . . establishes linkages with 
related community nutrition programs, nutrition education, food assistance, social or wel-
fare services, child care, services to the elderly, other human services, and community-
based research.32
Hughes,33 an international PHN workforce development researcher, called for a standard 
defi nition of PHN among a working group from nine countries so that that workforce require-
ments could be assessed internationally. Th e international work group recommended vari-
ous key descriptors from various aspects of the profession so that each country could develop 
its own defi nition that was best suited to the core functions and services that were unique to 
each country. Th e key descriptors to defi ne PHN were “solution-oriented, social and cultural 
aspects, advocacy, disease prevention, and interventions based on systems, communities and 
organizations.”33
In the ensuing years, defi nitions of PHN were formalized by several organizations and authors. 
Table 1.2 outlines organizations’ defi nitions of PHN since 1998. As seen, there are commonalities 
among the PHN defi nitions and for the scope of practice of PHN professionals, for example, 
advocating for a healthful environment for all; developing policies based on system- and popu-
lation-level assessments and program evaluations in priority populations; and collaborating with 
BOX 1.1
HEALTHY PEOPLE 2030 FOUNDATION PRINCIPLES, OVERARCHING GOALS, 
AND PLAN OF ACTION (CONTINUED)
 
■
Share and support the implementation of evidence-based programs and policies that are repli-
cable, scalable, and sustainable.
 
■
Report biennially on progress throughout the decade from 2020 to 2030.
 
■
Stimulate research and innovation toward meeting Healthy People 2030 goals and highlight 
critical research, data, and evaluation needs.
 
■
Facilitate development and availability of affordable means of health promotion, disease preven-
tion, and treatment.
Source: From U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Ofﬁ ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
Healthy People 2030 Framework. 2019, November 4. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about-healthy-people/
development-healthy-people-2030/framework


===PAGE 35===
10 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
key stakeholders to improve programs, services, and policies. Regardless of the defi nition used for 
PHN, the similarity of ideas is central to the distinct diff erentiation between PHN practice and 
clinical nutrition practice. Th us, these defi nitions indicate that PHN professionals should have 
advanced training in nutrition and public health to develop an in-depth knowledge of the most 
up-to-date nutrition-related evidence base and competencies and skills related to the core public 
health functions and the essential services of public health and PHN.
PHN: TRAINING AND WORKFORCE
In recent years, PHN has received more attention and greater research funding owing to problems 
both domestically and globally related to the obesity epidemic, chronic diseases, and food insecu-
rity.36 As the U.S. population and populations in other developed countries continue to get older 
and become more diverse, population needs and public health and clinical healthcare, including 
nutrition, will need to adjust. Longer life spans increase the duration of chronic diseases and rate of 
comorbidities, which increase the necessity of lifestyle interventions that target culturally appro-
priate nutrition and physical activity behaviors. Further, because of economic hardships in recent 
TABLE 1.2 DEFINITIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION BY ORGANIZATION AND DATE
ORGANIZATION
DATE
DEFINITION
United Kingdom 
Nutrition Society
1998
The application of nutrition and physical activity to the promotion 
of good health, the primary prevention of diet-related illness of 
groups, communities, and populations (not individuals)34
Strategic 
Intergovernmental 
Nutrition Alliance 
(Australia)
2001
Focuses on issues affecting the whole population rather than the 
specifi c dietary needs of individuals The impact of food production, 
distribution, and consumption on the nutritional status and health 
of particular population groups is taken into account, together 
with the knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviors in the broader 
community35
World Public Health 
Nutrition Association
2006
The promotion and maintenance of nutrition-related health and 
well-being of populations through organized efforts and informed 
choices of society31
Dietitians of Canada
2006
Health promotion through awareness raising, education and 
skill building, supportive environments and policy development, 
collaborations and partnerships, research and evaluation, and the 
mentoring and education of future nutrition and health profession-
als as well as other congruent descriptors29
Academy of Nutrition 
and Dietetics PHN 
Task Force
2012
The application of nutrition and public health principles to improve 
or maintain optimal health of populations and targeted groups 
through enhancements in programs, systems, policies, and 
environments28
Sources: From Uauy R. Understanding public health nutrition. Lancet. 2007;370(9584):309–310. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(07)61145-3; Strategic Intergovernmental Nutrition Alliance. Eat Well Australia: An Agenda for Action for Public 
Health Nutrition 2000–2010. Canberra, Australia: Department Health and Aged Care; 2001; Hughes R. Workforce 
development: challenges for practice, professionalization and progress. Public Health Nutr. 2008;11(8):765–767. 
doi:10.1017/S1368980008002899; Chenhall C. Public Health Nutrition Competencies: Summary of Key Informant 
Interviews. Toronto, Canada: Dietitians of Canada. 2006, September. https://www.dietitians.ca/Downloads/
Public/Public-Health-Nutrition-Competencies--key-informant.aspx; Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Public 
health nutrition: it’s every member’s business. HOD Backgrounder. 2012(Fall):1–22. https://www.eatrightpro.org/-/
media/eatrightpro-fi les/leadership/hod/mega-issues/backgrounders/09-public-health-nutrition-backgrounder.
pdf?la=en&hash=06B0F66D994A6BA0C574AB9A27FBA4A155AFD428


===PAGE 36===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
11
years, food assistance programs, such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, 
formerly the Food Stamp Program) and WIC, have had some of the greatest utilization rates 
in years. Because these programs are oft en targeted by proposed budget cuts, many Americans, 
especially low-income and other disenfranchised populations, may be at increased risk for nutri-
tion-related chronic diseases. In the United States and globally, it is essential to have highly 
trained PHN practitioners who can meet the needs of these populations and advocate for positive 
nutrition-related health outcomes for vulnerable populations across the life course.28,36,37 PHN 
practitioners’ knowledge and skills are essential to improving population health; they are essential 
members of interprofessional public health teams and assist with policy- and system-level deci-
sions for health promotion and disease prevention.37 Public health nutritionists’ competencies are 
particularly important now; the Patient Protection and Aff ordable Care Act38 underscores the 
need for primary prevention as well as screening and treatment of chronic diseases.39
Th e IOM40 delineated recommendations for training public health professionals, the myriad of 
health concerns, and the essentiality of multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary/interprofessional 
approaches in Who Will Keep the Public Healthy? Educating Public Health Professionals for the 
21st Century. Th e document asserts that to improve the nation’s health, all members of multidis-
ciplinary/interdisciplinary/interprofessional teams must be well trained and use evidence-based 
guidelines and best practices. It is essential that public health nutritionists have the competencies 
needed to help curtail obesity epidemic rates and decrease rates of other nutrition-related chronic 
diseases. Th us, PHN training should include in-depth exposure to the Social-Ecological Model,41 
along with other behavioral theories, and the social determinants of health because it is essential 
for public health nutritionists to understand how behavioral, environmental, biological, socie-
tal, and economic factors infl uence individual health and, subsequently, population health.37,42 
Further, training in PHN should include applied nutrition science; nutrition across the life course; 
policy development, implementation, and evaluation; biostatistics; epidemiology; public policy 
related to nutrition and food assistance; community assessment; and program planning, imple-
mentation, and evaluation.43
PHN: POSITIONS AND CAREER SETTINGS
Position descriptions, classifi cations, educational requirements, and career settings for PHN prac-
titioners are outlined in Personnel in Public Health Nutrition for the 2000s.44 In this document, PHN 
professionals are described as “specialized nutrition professionals and paraprofessionals who pro-
vide and/or plan nutrition programs through organizations that reach people living in a designated 
community”.44 PHN professionals may be employed in numerous career settings at state, local, and 
national agencies and organizations in both the public and private sectors. In addition to local 
and state public health agencies, other common places that employ or contract with PHN practi-
tioners include federally qualifi ed community health clinics, nonprofi t organizations, state depart-
ments of education, food assistance programs, hunger-relief agencies, early childhood education 
settings such as Head Start, and local education agencies, where they are employed as nutrition 
educators, school health coordinators, or directors of nutrition services. In addition, public health 
nutritionists work in federally sponsored programs at the local level, such as WIC, SNAP-Ed, and 
the Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program, and many federal agencies such as the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the CDC, 
Food and Drug Administration, Maternal and Child Health Bureau, and Indian Health Services. 
Although this list is not all inclusive, it does show the variety of job settings for PHN personnel.


===PAGE 37===
12 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
PHN positions can be classifi ed across a continuum of services and functions from direct 
care services to population and systems focused work.44 To infl uence individual and popula-
tion health, professionals in PHN work across the spheres of infl uence in the Social-Ecological 
Model (Figure 1.3).41,45,46,58 However, most oft en, these practitioners focus on the outer spheres 
at the societal and policy levels and within sectors and organizations. Personnel in management 
positions, which include directors, assistant directors, and supervisors, work predominantly in 
administrative roles and have little direct contact with their priority populations. Public health 
nutritionists, consultants, clinical nutritionists, nutritionists, and nutrition educators are classi-
fi ed as professional positions. While public health nutritionists and consultants may have some 
direct interactions with community members, much of their work is in program planning, 
implementation, and evaluation. Other professional positions, including clinical nutritionists, 
nutritionists, and nutrition educators, along with positions classifi ed as technical and support 
FIGURE 1.3 The Social-Ecological Model.
Source: Data from U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Pro-
motion. The 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines. The Social-Ecological Model. 2015. https://health.gov/dietaryguide-
lines/2015/guidelines/chapter-3/social-ecological-model; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Social 
Ecological Model: A Framework for Prevention. 2019, January. http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/overview/
social-ecologicalmodel.html; World Health Organization. Violence Prevention Alliance. The Ecological Framework. 
2019. https://www.who.int/violenceprevention/approach/ecology/en.; Bronfenbrenner U. Toward an experimental 
ecology of human development. Am Psychol. 1977;32(7):513–531. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.32.7.513
Individual
Interpersonal
Organizational
Sectors
Societal and policy
Norms
Traditions
Beliefs
Religions
National, state, and local policies and laws
National, regional, and local heritage
Societal changes
Economic safety nets
Worksites
Parks and recreation
Early childhood education
   settings 
Schools
Colleges and universities
Community organizations
Family
Friends
Social networks, including
   influencers
Coworkers
Peers
Colleagues
Government
Education
Healthcare 
Transportation
Public health
Business
Community
Sex
Gender preferences 
Age
Income status
Education level
Literacy level
Race and ethnicity 
Disability status
Food preferences 
Genetic predisposition
Acute childhood traumas
Biological factors
Environmental history


===PAGE 38===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
13
positions, such as nutrition technicians and community nutrition workers, usually have direct 
contact with the public with a focus on delivery of services. Personnel at the management 
level and public health nutritionists and consultants at the professional level require advanced 
training in public health and nutrition so that they are competent in community assessment; 
are able to plan, implement, and evaluate population- and systems-level programs and services; 
and have the knowledge and skills required to collaborate and lead interprofessional teams to 
promote population health.44
According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,47 career growth in nutrition and dietetics is 
projected to increase over the next decade by 11%, which is higher than growth in many other 
professions. Job growth in PHN may increase even more if the healthcare system continues to 
shift  from a medical treatment model to one of primary prevention.39 In 2018, the average pay for 
dietitians/nutritionists was $64,670 annually, with higher paying positions in states on the West 
Coast and in large metropolitan areas.47
PHN: FUTURE TRENDS
In 2006, the World Congress of PHN, an international association of PHN practitioners, acade-
micians, researchers, clinical and public health professionals, policy-makers, and epidemiologists 
from 79 countries, convened a discussion session to examine the future trends and educational 
needs of PHN professionals nationally, regionally, and globally.48 Th e panel outlined a global need 
for research, improved technology, and strong collaborations between academia and both pri-
vate and public sectors to fi nd solutions to malnutrition, both under- and overnutrition, and 
other nutrition-related health problems. Th e panel recommended that multiple disciplines from 
both developed and developing countries should collaborate to fi nd solutions to the global prob-
lems, similar to how multinational, multidisciplinary teams have worked to eliminate or dra-
matically reduce communicable diseases via immunization. Also, the panel recommended that 
once formed, the collaborations would need to be guided by shared ethical principles, transpar-
ency, and open communication. Th us far, such collaborations have been limited, but in May 2008, 
based on recommendations from the World PHN Congress, the World Association of PHN was 
incorporated.49 Th e purpose of the association is to bring people together to promote and improve 
PHN and to be the international voice of PHN.
Because current PHN professionals must work to meet the nutrition-related needs of the pub-
lic to promote population health through nutrition services, interventions, initiatives and pol-
icy, systems, and environmental change, it is important that this workforce be trained through 
graduate coursework and experiential learning and, aft er entry into the workforce via continuing 
education, have opportunities for leadership development and other professional development 
training.50 Hughes,31 in an editorial about PHN workforce development, outlined key areas that 
should be examined to increase the capacity and quality of highly trained PHN professionals, 
including increased scholarship for the PHN workforce, strong assessment to determine work-
force needs, in both developing and developed nations, and funding to conduct such research 
and train the workforce. Shrimpton et al.50 noted that development of workforce capacity in PHN 
should be assessed at each of the following levels: in the PHN workforce, within communities, 
and at organizational and systems levels.
Currently, PHN workforce development needs are addressed via multiple training avenues, 
including online certifi cate training, such as the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Center 
for Lifelong Learning Public Health Nutrition Online Certifi cate Training;51 academic graduate 


===PAGE 39===
14 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
certifi cate programs, such as Appalachian State University Graduate Certifi cate in Public Health 
Nutrition Practice;52 academic coursework in nutrition and public health; graduate programs in 
PHN and community nutrition;6 and certifi cation programs, for example, Certifi cation in Public 
Health53 and Certifi ed Health Education Specialist.54 Although an undergraduate degree in nutri-
tion is necessary and advanced education at the graduate level and the registered dietitian/nutri-
tionist credential is preferred, currently there is no specifi c credential or licensure available to 
denote a professional’s advanced training in PHN. Th us, some public health nutritionists may not 
have the advanced training and competencies to adequately perform their role. Without advanced 
training and practice, PHN professionals may be ill-prepared to carry out the core functions of 
public health and the essential PHN services and work at the system, population, and community 
levels.29 Th us, in the future to protect population health, all public health nutritionists should have 
graduate-level PHN coursework and/or degrees to ensure that the workforce is competent in the 
areas of community nutrition assessment; program planning, implementation, and evaluation; 
policy development, implementation, and evaluation; and policy systems and environmental 
change.29,37,43
Another key area of future focus for the PHN workforce is leadership development to 
ensure organization-, community-, policy-, and systems-level competencies to promote 
health and prevent nutrition-related diseases for populations.55 The current workforce in 
PHN is aging;56 this will lead to many retirements and the absence of PHN practitioners in 
leadership roles in the profession.55,56 Thus, future demands on the PHN workforce must 
be addressed to help close these gaps. Leadership development is and will continue to be 
imperative to the PHN profession, as it will allow entry- and midlevel career personnel in 
PHN to be better equipped to fill vacant leadership positions in public health and PHN and 
mentor students, trainees, and interns in the field.57 Because the number of PHN practi-
tioners needed domestically and globally may take several decades to reach the capacity to 
serve population needs, increased graduate programs in PHN and continuing education for 
current practitioners are necessary.50
Closely aligned with leadership development, developing skilled mentors will also be key to 
increasing the capacity of the PHN workforce in the future. Palermo et al.,57 Australian advo-
cates for and researchers on PHN workforce development, recommended the development 
of PHN mentoring circles, that is, pairing an experienced PHN professional with a group of 
entry-level PHN practitioners. Th is could increase each mentor’s capacity and eff ectiveness. 
Although the eff ectiveness of these mentoring circles would depend on the commitment, 
signifi cance, and involvement of everyone in the group, it could be a valid solution to the 
shortage of experienced PHN practitioners who can assist in the development of new PHN 
practitioners and leaders.
CONCLUSION
PHN has a rich history of improving population health and a challenging, ambitious, and exciting 
future in decreasing nutrition-related health disparities, ensuring access to food, and improving 
the health status of populations across the globe. Th is text guides readers through three parts 
related to domestic and global PHN. It presents a comprehensive survey of where the fi eld has 
been taken due to the work of Mary Egan and other notable leaders in the fi eld, allowing for 
groundbreaking new opportunities for practitioners, researchers, policy-makers, and other pub-
lic health professionals.


===PAGE 40===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
15
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Public health nutrition, as defi ned by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Public 
Health Nutrition Task Force is, “the application of nutrition and public health princi-
ples to improve or maintain optimal health of populations and targeted groups through 
enhancements in programs, systems, policies, and environments”.28
2. 
Public health nutritionist, as defi ned my Margaret Kaufman, is “that member of 
the public health agency staff  who is responsible for assessing community nutrition 
needs and planning, organizing, managing, directing, coordinating, and evaluating 
the nutrition component of the health agency’s services . . . establishes linkages with 
related community nutrition programs, nutrition education, food assistance, social or 
welfare services, child care, services to the elderly, other human services, and commu-
nity-based research”.32
3. 
Th e Social-Ecological Model can be used by public health nutritionists to help them 
understand the multiple levels of infl uence on nutrition- and other health-related 
behaviors. Th e spheres of infl uence include:
a. 
Th e individual level, which encompasses age, sex, literacy level, race and ethnicity, 
food preferences, acute childhood traumas, and more
b. Th e interpersonal level, which includes families, friends, social networks, 
 coworkers, and peers
c. 
Th e organizational level, which includes worksites, parks and recreation facilities, 
early childhood education settings, schools, colleges and universities, and commu-
nity organizations
d. Sectors, including governmental, educational, healthcare, transportation, public 
health, community, and business sectors
e. 
Societal and policy levels, such as traditions, beliefs, religions, policies and laws, 
societal changes, and economic safety nets
4. 
Th e core functions of public health are assessment, assurance, and policy development. 
Th ere are 10 essential public health services and 16 essential PHN services that support 
these core functions.
5. 
Public health nutritionists should have advanced training in nutrition and public health 
to develop knowledge of current nutrition-related evidence-based skills related to the core 
functions of public health and the essential health services of public health and PHN.
CASE STUDY: A PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITIONIST’S PROCESS 
FOR INCREASING ACCESS TO HEALTHFUL FOODS IN 
URBAN AND RURAL COMMUNITIES WITH MOBILE FOOD 
MARKETS
A public health nutritionist is working with other public health and nutrition professionals on 
a state coalition to increase access to healthful foods in urban and rural communities. Th e team 
begins by assessing the number and types of retail food stores across the state. Aft er fi nding this 
information, they then look at the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Economic Research 


===PAGE 41===
16 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Service Food Access Research Atlas (www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FoodDesert). Th ey fi nd that many 
low-income populations in the state have low access to food stores and low vehicle access. Further, 
the assessment data show that these areas have the highest rates of child and adult obesity and 
type 2 diabetes. Th ese fi ndings lead the coalition to seek funds for mobile food markets in col-
laboration with a local food bank and a local grocery store chain. Aft er writing a successful grant 
application to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (www.rwjf.org) and receiving funding, the 
coalition begins marketing the mobile food markets in eight of the lowest income counties in the 
state with the lowest access to healthful foods. To reach the most people, the coalition uses social 
media, provides infographics at the SNAP offi  ce (www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutri-
tion-assistance-program) and at area schools and religious organizations, and runs advertise-
ments about the opening day via radio, television, and billboards.
On the opening day, the mobile markets provide low-cost and no-cost healthful foods and 
beverages to 2,800 families (over 10,000 individuals). In addition, coalition volunteers help eli-
gible participants enroll in SNAP and survey participants to determine barriers and challenges 
to preparing the foods that the mobile markets carry. Th e survey results show that participants 
would like to learn more about how to prepare healthful foods; thus, coalition members contact 
extension agents in the area to see if they can do cooking demonstrations at the next mobile mar-
ket via SNAP-Ed and other USDA programs. In addition, they contact the state department of 
education to propose high school curricular changes that allow students to take nutrition courses 
that include healthy food preparation methods. Last, coalition members advocate for improved 
zoning rules in the priority counties to attract full-service grocery stores to the areas.
Case Study Questions
a. 
Identify at least 10 essential PHN services described in the case study and categorize 
them by the associated core functions of public health.
b. Use the Economic Research Service Food Access Research Atlas to fi nd your home 
county and determine if there are low-income, low-access areas there.
c. 
In what other areas could the coalition advocate to improve food access for the priority 
communities?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
Explore the Association of State Public Health Nutrition website (www.asphn.org) and 
complete the following:
i. List the association’s mission and vision.
ii. Describe at least two committees or councils in the association.
iii. List one way you could become involved in the association.
2. 
Visit the SNAP website (www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutrition-assis-
tance-program) and fi nd the following:
i. Based on the website, provide a brief description of SNAP in your own words.
ii. What are the eligibility requirements for SNAP?
iii. What can be purchased with SNAP benefi ts?


===PAGE 42===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
17
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
Discuss why it is important for public health nutritionists to have advanced training in 
both nutrition and public health?
2. 
Th is chapter lists several defi nitions of PHN; compare and contrast these defi nitions by 
discussing the commonalities and diff erences among them.
3. 
Describe at least fi ve ways that public health nutritionists can work with other public 
health professionals to improve population health.
4. 
List and describe at least fi ve historical milestone events and/or legislation that led to 
expanded roles of public health nutritionists in the United States.
5. 
Describe the purpose of the World Public Health Nutrition Association.
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
American Public Health Association Food and Nutrition Section. https://www.apha.org/apha-communities/
member-sections/food-and-nutrition/who-we-are
Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition. www.agpphn.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—Nutrition. https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health. 
https://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/index.htm
Healthy People 2030. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/About-Healthy-People/Development-Healthy-
People-2030/Framework
Th e Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Public Health/Community Nutrition Dietetic Practice Group. 
https://www.phcnpg.org/page/about
U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service. https://www.usda.gov/topics/food-and
-nutrition
GLOSSARY
Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition: One of the fi rst formalized 
organizations for the profession, created in 1950.
Association of State Public Health Nutritionists: One of the fi rst formalized organizations for 
the profession, created in 1952.
Evidence-based: Practice that relies on scientifi c evidence for decision-making and informing 
practice.
Food and Drug Act: Passed by Congress in 1906 to begin oversight of food production, sales, 
and labeling.
Global PHN practice: Developed, transitioning, and developing countries have their own 
unique histories related to the foundations of public health and growth of PHN.
Healthy People: Series of documents that are science-based health objectives for the U.S. pop-
ulation, released every 10 years.
Key descriptors to defi ne PHN: Solution-oriented, social and cultural aspects, advocacy, dis-
ease prevention, and interventions based on systems, communities, and organizations.
Mary Egan: Leader in shaping contemporary PHN education and practice in the United States.


===PAGE 43===
18 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Moving to the Future: Developing Community-Based Nutrition Services: Text providing the 
delineation of the essential PHN services in relationship to the core functions of public health.
Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for Americans: Hallmark document providing 
dietary guidance for the U.S. population that focused on healthful dietary patterns.
Patient Protection and Aff ordable Care Act: Legislation that underscores the need for prima-
ry prevention as well as screening and treatment of chronic diseases; passed in 2010.
Public health nutritionist: A member of the public health agency staff  responsible for assess-
ing community nutrition needs and planning, organizing, managing, directing, coordinating, 
and evaluating the nutrition component of the health agency’s services.
Social determinants of health: Behavioral, environmental, biological, societal, and economic 
factors that infl uence individual and population health.
Social-Ecological Model: Key model for application by public health nutritionists to under-
stand how behavioral, societal, and economic factors infl uence health.
Social Security Act: Legislation that infl uenced public health infrastructure and subsequent 
growth of PHN, passed in 1935.
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC): One of 
the fi rst programs to provide nutrition services to pregnant women, infants, and children, estab-
lished in 1972.
Th e Future of Public Health: Groundbreaking document outlining the three core functions of 
public health—assessment, policy development, and assurance—and the 10 essential services 
of public health, released by the IOM in 1988.
White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children: First conference, held in 1909, 
by the White House related to PHN.
World Health Organization (WHO): Created in 1948 as part of the United Nations, formed 
to combat communicable diseases and to improve maternal, infant, and child health and 
 nutrition.
World Public Health Nutrition Association: First international organization to promote and 
improve PHN and to be the international voice of PHN.
REFERENCES
1. Egan M. Public health nutrition: a historical perspective. J Am Diet Assoc. 1994;94(3):298–304. 
doi:10.1016/0002-8223(94)90372-7
2. Winslow CEA. Th e Evolution and Signifi cance of the Modern Public Health Campaign. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press; 1923.
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Th e Public Health System. 2018, June. https://www.cdc.gov/
publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html
4. Institute of Medicine. Th e Future of Public Health. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1988. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK218224
5. Michael J, Goldstein M. Reviving the White House Conference on Children. Children’s Voice. 2008;17(1). 
https://www.cwla.org/reviving-the-white-house-conference-on-children
6. Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition. Directory. 2019, October. https://agpphn
.org/directory
7. White House Conference on Food, Nutrition, and Health, 1970. https://academic.oup.com/
nutritionreviews/article/27/9/247/1875780


===PAGE 44===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
19
8. National WIC Association. WIC Program Overview and History. https://www.nwica.org/overview-and
-history
9. Owen GM, Kram KM, Garry PJ, et al. A study of nutritional status of preschool children in the United 
States, 1968-1970. Pediatrics. 1974;52(suppl):597–646.
10. Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Ten-state nutrition survey, 1968-1970. Atlanta, GA: U.S. 
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Publication no. HSM 72-8134; 1972.
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Data. History. 2015, November 6. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
nhanes/history.htm
12. U.S. Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs. Dietary Goals for the United States. 2nd 
ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Offi  ce; 1977.
13. Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Year 2000 national health objectives. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 1989;38(37):629–633.
14. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
Healthy People. 2019, November 4. https://www.healthypeople.gov
15. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Nutrition and 
Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Home and Garden Bulletin No. 232; 1980. https://pubs
.nal.usda.gov/sites/pubs.nal.usda.gov/fi les/hgb.htm#nbr220
16. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Dietary Guidelines Committee. Report 
of the Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 1995, to the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Agriculture. Appendix I: History of Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans. 1995. https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga95/12DIETAP.HTM
17. Remington PL, Brownson RC. Fift y years of progress in chronic disease epidemiology and control. Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60(4):70–77. 
18. Haughton B, Story M, Keir B. Profi le of public health nutrition personnel: challenges for population/
system-focused roles and state-level monitoring. J Am Diet Assoc. 1998;98(6):664–670.
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Th e 10 Essential Public Health Services. 2018, June. https://
www.cdc.gov/publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html
20. Probert K. Moving to the Future: Developing Community-Based Nutrition Services. Washington, DC: 
Association of State and Territorial Public Health Nutrition Directors; 1996.
21. Hughes R, Begley A, Yeatman H. Consensus on the core functions of the public health nutrition 
workforce in Australia. Nutr Diet. 2016;73(1):103–111.
22. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
History and Development of Healthy People. 2019, November 4. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/
About-Healthy-People/History-Development-Healthy-People-2020
23. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
Healthy People 2020 Leading Health Indicators: Progress Update. 2019, November 4. https://
www.healthypeople.gov/2020/leading-health-indicators/Healthy-People-2020-Leading-Health-
Indicators%3A-Progress-Update
24. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
Healthy People 2030 Framework. 2019, November 4. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about
-healthy-people/development-healthy-people-2030/framework
25. Fielding JE. Public health in the twentieth century: Advances and challenges. Annu Rev Public Health. 
1999;20(1):xiii–xxx. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.20.1.0
26. Schmidt H. Chronic disease prevention and health promotion. In: Barrett DH, Ortmann LH, Dawson 
A, et al. eds. Public Health Ethics: Cases Spanning the Globe. Cham, Switzerland: Springer; 2016. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK435779
27. World Health Organization. History of WHO. 2019. https://www.who.int/about/who-we-are/history.
28. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Public Health Nutrition: It’s Every Member’s Business. HOD 
Backgrounder. 2012. https://www.eatrightpro.org/-/media/eatrightpro-files/leadership/hod/mega
-issues/backgrounders/09-public-health-nutrition-backgrounder.pdf?la=en&hash=06B0F66D994
A6BA0C574AB9A27FBA4A155AFD428
29. Chenhall C. Public Health Nutrition Competencies: Summary of Key Informant Interviews. Dietitians 
of Canada. 2006, September. https://www.dietitians.ca/Downloads/Public/Public-Health-Nutrition
-Comptencies--key-informant.aspx


===PAGE 45===
20 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
30. Hughes R. Competencies for eff ective public health nutrition practice: a developing consensus. Public 
Health Nutr. 2004;7(5):683–691.
31. Hughes R. Workforce development: challenges for practice, professionalization and progress. Public 
Health Nutr. 2008;11(8):765–767. doi:10.1017/S1368980008002899
32. Kaufman M, ed. Personnel in Public Health Nutrition for the 1980’s. McLean, VA: Association of State 
and Territorial Health Offi  cials Foundation; 1982.
33. Hughes R. Defi nitions for public health nutrition: a developing consensus. Public Health Nutr. 
2003;6(6):615–620. doi:10.1079/PHN2003487
34. Uauy R. Understanding public health nutrition. Lancet. 2007;370(9584):309–310. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(07)61145-3
35. Strategic Intergovernmental Nutrition Alliance. Eat Well Australia: An Agenda for Action for Public 
Health Nutrition 2000–2010. Canberra, Australia: Department of Health and Aged Care; 2001.
36. Rhea M, Bettles C. Future changes driving dietetics workforce supply and demand: future scan 2012-
2022. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;112(3):S10–S24. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2011.12.008
37. Haughton B, Stang J. Population risk factors and trends in health care and public policy. J Acad Nutr 
Diet. 2012;112(3):S35–S46. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2011.12.011
38. Patient Protection and Aff ordable Care Act, 42 USC §18001 (2010).
39. Wells EV, Sarigiannis AN, Boulton ML. Assessing integration of clinical and public health skills in 
preventive medicine residencies: using competency mapping. Am J Prev Med. 2012;42(6):S107–S116. 
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.04.004
40. Institute of Medicine. Who Will Keep the Public Healthy? Educating Public Health Professionals for the 
21st Century. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2003. doi:10.17226/10542
41. Bronfenbrenner U. Toward and experimental ecology of human development. Am Psychol. 
1977;32(7):513–531. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.32.7.513
42. Institute of Medicine. Promoting Health: Intervention Strategies from Social and Behavioral Research. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2000.
43. Spence ML, ed. Strategies for Success: Curriculum Guide (Didactic and Experiential Learning). 3rd ed. 
Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition; 2013.
44. Dodds JM. Personnel in Public Health Nutrition for the 2000s. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public 
Health Nutritionists; 2009. https://www.asphn.org/resource_fi les/105/105_resource_fi le1.pdf
45. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion. Th e 2015-2020 Dietary Guidelines. Th e Social-Ecological Model. 2015. https://health.gov/
dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/chapter-3/social-ecological-model
46. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Th e Social Ecological Model: A Framework for Prevention. 
2019, January. http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/overview/social-ecologicalmodel.html
47. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Occupational Outlook Handbook, Dietitians and 
Nutritionists. 2019, September 4. https://www.bls.gov/ooh/healthcare/dietitians-and-nutritionists.htm
48. Serra-Majem L. Moving forward in public health nutrition: the I World Congress of Public Health 
Nutrition. Nutr Rev. 2009;67(suppl 1):S2–S6. doi:10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00150.x
49. World Public Health Nutrition Association. Our Work. Our History. 2018. https://www.wphna.org/
about
50. Shrimpton R, Hughes R, Recine E, et al. Nutrition capacity development: a practice framework. Public 
Health Nutr. 2013;7(3):682–688. doi:10.1017/S1368980013001213
51. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Certifi cates of Training. Public Health Nutrition-Modules 1-5. 
https://www.eatrightstore.org/cpe-opportunities/certifi cates-of-training?pageSize=20&pageIndex=3&s
ortBy=namedesc
52. Appalachian State University. App State Online. Public Health Nutrition Practice Graduate Certifi cate. 
https://online.appstate.edu/programs/id/public-health-nutrition
53. National Board of Public Health Examiners. Credentialing Public Health Leaders. 2019. https://www
.nbphe.org
54. National Commission for Health Education Credentialing, Inc. Health Education Credentialing. https://
www.nchec.org/health-education-credentialing
55. Wright K, Rowitz L, Merkle A, et al. Competency development in public health leadership. Am J Public 
Health. 2000;90(8):1202–1207. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.8.1202


===PAGE 46===
 
1. Introduction to Public Health Nutrition 
21
56. Haughton B, George A. Th e Public Health Nutrition workforce and its future challenges: the US 
experience. Public Health Nutr. 2008;11(8):782–791. doi:10.1017/S1368980008001821
57. Palermo C, Hughes R, McCall L. An evaluation of a public health nutrition workforce development 
intervention for the nutrition and dietetics workforce. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2010;23:244–253. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-277X.2010.01069.x
58. World Health Organization. Violence Prevention Alliance. Th e ecological framework. 2019. https://www
.who.int/violenceprevention/approach/ecology/en


===PAGE 48===
2
NUTRITION EPIDEMIOLOGY 
PRINCIPLES
ERIN BOULDIN, KAREN GRIMMER, AND RONNY A. BELL
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the basics of epidemiology with reference to nutrition.
2. Identify diff erent sources of research evidence.
3. Understand the limitations around each research evidence source.
4. Determine the research evidence required to make informed healthcare decisions.
INTRODUCTION
Epidemiology and Role in Public Health Nutrition
Health is a fundamental human right (www.who.int/healthsystems/topics/equity/en). Health is 
measured in a range of ways, and it is not just the absence of disease.
In this chapter, the term “disease” is used in epidemiological terms, as an umbrella term for 
a disease diagnosis, death, a poor health outcome (for instance, high body mass index [BMI] 
or low back pain), and problematic health event (like a car crash). Th e term exposure is used 
ubiquitously for any factor that may be associated with disease. Th ere is an array of factors, but 
common ones include biological, familial/genetic, chemical, physical, occupational, psychosocial, 
socioeconomic, geographic, travel-related, educational, cultural, and nutrition.1
Public health is the “science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting 
human health through organized eff orts and informed choices of society, organizations, public 
and private, communities and individuals.”2 An alternative defi nition of public health is provided 
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Foundation in the United States as “the 
science of protecting and improving the health of people and their communities. Th is work is 
achieved by promoting healthy lifestyles, researching disease and injury prevention, and detect-
ing, preventing and responding to infectious diseases.”3 Th e traditional core disciplines of public 
health are biostatistics, epidemiology, health policy and management, social and behavioral sci-
ences, and environmental health. However, public health is informed and carried out by a number 
of other disciplines, including health services, community health, behavioral health, health eco-
nomics, mental health, sexual and reproductive health, gender issues in health, and occupational 
safety.4 Information combined from these areas of practice underpins public health knowledge, 
priorities, and decisions.5


===PAGE 49===
24 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Epidemiology is the study of health in populations.6,7 Epidemiology encompasses a set of meth-
ods by which population health (public health) and the threats to it are assessed and monitored.6
LET US CONSIDER PUBLIC HEALTH FIRST
Th e term “public” in “public health” is variably interpreted, depending on circumstances and 
the health challenges being dealt with.2 “Public” refl ects the group of interest, which can be a 
defi ned group of people faced with a particular threat to health, a whole town, one region in a 
country, a whole country, or many countries. “Health” takes into account physical, mental, and 
social well-being and thus is not merely the absence of disease or infi rmity.8 Modern public health 
practice requires multidisciplinary teams comprising epidemiologists, biostatisticians, medical 
assistants, public health nurses, midwives, medical microbiologists, economists, sociologists, 
geneticists, and data managers. Depending on the problem, additional support may be required 
from environmental health offi  cers, public health inspectors, bioethicists, veterinarians, gender 
experts, and sexual and reproductive health specialists.5
Public health aims to improve populations’ quality of life through surveillance of existing cases 
and health indicators and by promoting healthy environments and behaviors.5 Examples of public 
health interests are ensuring healthy and suffi  cient drinking water, appropriate sanitation, vacci-
nations for childhood communicable diseases, appropriate nutrition, and prevention of transmis-
sible diseases.
Ten essential services of public health were proposed in 1994 by the CDC Core Public Health 
Functions Steering Committee.9 Th ese services link to the four core functions of public health: 
assessment, policy development, quality assurance, and research:
Assessment:
1. Monitor health status to identify and solve community health problems.
2. Diagnose and investigate health problems and health hazards in the community.
Policy Development:
3. Inform, educate, and empower people about health issues.
4. Mobilize community partnerships and action to identify and solve health problems.
5. Develop policies and plans that support individual and community health eff orts.
Assurance:
6. Enforce laws and regulations that protect health and ensure safety.
7. Link people to needed personal health services and assure the provision of healthcare 
when otherwise unavailable.
8. Assure a competent public and personal healthcare workforce.
9. Evaluate eff ectiveness, accessibility, and quality of personal and population-based 
health services.
Research:
10. Investigations for new insights and innovative solutions to health problems.
Public health and the essential component services listed previously are interlinked by equity 
principles and social determinants of health (SDOH); see Figure 2.1. Equity is defi ned by the 
World Health Organization (WHO) “as the absence of avoidable or remediable diff erences among 


===PAGE 50===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
25
groups of people, whether those groups are defi ned socially, economically, demographically, or 
geographically, and where there is opportunity for everyone to attain their full health potential 
regardless of demographic, social, economic or geographic strata.”10 Health inequities usually 
involve more than inequality with respect to health determinants; they also involve access to 
the resources needed to improve and maintain health or health outcomes. Whitehead, an early 
researcher in equity, noted that “the term ‘inequity’ has moral and ethical dimensions. Th is refers 
to diff erences which are unnecessary and avoidable, and also unfair and unjust.”11 Th e Cochrane 
Collaboration promotes the use of the PROGRESS Plus checklist for researchers to ensure that 
research questions and their underpinning methods are appropriately planned so that sampling 
and data collection identifi es and addresses relevant issues of equity.12,13 Th e PROGRESS Plus 
mnemonic describes categories of social diff erentiation as Place of residence; Race/ethnicity/cul-
ture/language; Occupation; Gender/sex; Religion; Education; Socioeconomic status; and Social 
capital. Plus refers to (a) personal characteristics associated with discrimination (e.g., age, disabil-
ity); (b) features of relationships (e.g., smoking parents, excluded from school); and (c) time-de-
pendent relationships (e.g., leaving the hospital, respite care, other instances when a person may 
be temporarily at a disadvantage). SDOH relate to the health risks associated with places where 
“people live, learn, work, and play.”14 SDOH include people’s neighborhood and built environ-
ment; economic stability; education; health and healthcare, and social and community contexts.15
Public health nutrition is a quickly growing area, but it is currently variably defi ned. Th e 
Giessen Declaration defi ned nutrition science as the study of food systems, foods and drinks 
and their nutrients and other constituents, and their interactions within and between all rele-
vant biological, social, and environmental systems.16 Lawrence and Worsley built on this defi ni-
tion and contend that public health nutrition is concerned with promoting and maintaining the 
FIGURE 2.1 Social determinants of health (SDOH).
Source: From Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Social Determinants of Health. 2019. https://www
.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-of-health
Economic
stability
Health and
healthcare
Social and
community
context
Education
Neighborhood
and built
environment
SDOH


===PAGE 51===
26 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
nutritional health of populations and is a fundamental resource for the social, cultural, and eco-
nomic well-being of local, national, and global communities.17 On the other hand, Th e Nutrition 
Society in the United Kingdom “defi nes public health nutrition as the application of nutrition and 
physical activity to the promotion of good health, the primary prevention of diet-related illness 
of groups, communities, and populations (not individuals).”18 Th is diff erentiates public health 
nutrition from clinical nutrition and medical nutritional practices.
LET US NOW CONSIDER EPIDEMIOLOGY AS A PUBLIC HEALTH 
BUILDING BLOCK
As noted earlier, epidemiology is a fundamental public health building block that estimates 
the strength of association between disease and its potential causes. Th e word “epidemiology” 
comes from Greek: epi = among, demos = people, and logos = study. Epidemiological research 
is oft en observational and, as such, may not deliberately intervene in people’s environments 
to manipulate their circumstances. Epidemiological research may also include intervention 
research (trials/experiments), in which deliberate intervention into people’s environments 
or behaviors is the core research component. Epidemiological research capitalizes on natural 
occurrences and the fact that humans make choices, or have diff erent opportunities to encoun-
ter exposures, that might cause them to contract diseases or experience poor health outcomes. 
Epidemiological research is an appropriate way of studying population choices and behaviors 
or the impact of specifi c events (changes to country’s laws or natural disasters), particularly 
when it is impractical or unethical to intervene in a population to produce disease. Th us, epi-
demiology is the research method of choice to examine situations in which diseases occur 
naturally in specifi c locations or might be the result of exposures such as occupational hazards, 
cigarette smoking, or poor diets.
Clinical epidemiology goes hand in hand with biostatistics because the underpinning tenet 
of epidemiology is the capacity to measure exposures and disease accurately, to understand their 
relationships, and to take account of potentially confounding and modifying factors.7 Biostatistics, 
which applies statistical concepts to the fi eld of human and population health, off ers a set of tools 
to evaluate the quality of measures and to construct models that enable us to compare health 
outcomes across populations and exposures. Th is does not suggest that epidemiological infer-
ences can be made by simply examining associations between measures in a dataset (data mining) 
and then proposing theories to explain what has been found. Any epidemiological investigation 
requires careful a priori hypothesis setting and considering the underlying rationale for the pro-
posed exposures to be linked with disease outcomes. A priori (Latin for “from the former”) means 
ideas that formed or conceived beforehand.19 More about this is discussed later.
Common reasons to apply epidemiological principles include
 
■
Understanding cause and eff ect (for instance, disease causality or whether disease 
occurs diff erently in diff erent populations)
 
■
Defi ning population characteristics that could inform future experimental research
 
■
Understanding important subgroups or combinations of factors that impact health
Many epidemiologists argue that no one should attempt to conduct an intervention study (exper-
iment/trial) without fi rst exploring all that is known about the epidemiology of the condition 
and its determinants.6,19,20 It is particularly important to ensure that good statistical principles are 


===PAGE 52===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
27
followed when an experiment is conducted, for instance, when establishing that there is no dif-
ference at baseline between trial arms. Unless epidemiological research has identifi ed important 
confounders (important variables that might obscure the true relationship between an exposure 
and disease), testing for homogeneity at baseline may fail to identify the impact of important 
characteristics of subjects or the environment.
HISTORY OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epidemiology is generally considered to be a “‘young” research area in that it has really only 
emerged in research importance in the Western literature in the past 50 or so years. Indeed, epi-
demiological methods, understandings, and mechanics have improved exponentially since the 
early 1980s as it has become easier to share knowledge nationally and internationally, surveillance 
mechanisms have become more accurate, understanding of the biology of disease has improved, 
and soft ware and computing capacity has developed and refi ned. Such is the importance of the 
area that acquiring some understanding of epidemiological and biostatistical principles is con-
sidered essential to the curricula in health training programs, if not in undergraduate programs, 
then certainly in graduate and postgraduate programs.
However, epidemiological observations have been reported for centuries, and some of the most 
impactful fi ndings about disease causality have occurred by keen observation, well before com-
puters or even recognition of the germ theory of disease. Early epidemiological research could be 
termed “forensic epidemiology,” as it was usually associated with determining causes of diseases 
which were posing serious and immediate threats to health. Observation and critical thinking are 
what epidemiology is all about, underpinned by careful a priori consideration of biological rationale 
and reasoned deductions on available evidence. One oft en-cited example of historical observational 
epidemiology is the story of the Broad Street well in Soho, London, and the cholera outbreak, involv-
ing an early epidemiologist and public health activist, Dr. John Snow, in 1854 (see Box 2.1). John 
Snow is credited with challenging the predominant “miasma theory" with detailed evidence of cause 
and eff ect regarding the spread of cholera via the water in the well. Th e miasma theory was widely 
proposed by learned people at the time, who believed that diseases were spread through “bad air,” in 
which particles from decomposed matter become part of the air and cause the spread of disease.21
Another historical example of epidemiological enquiry is that of rickets (called the English dis-
ease), for which there are over 400 years of medical observations and theories. Th is disease largely 
aff ects babies and young children and is evidenced by retarded bone growth—particularly leg 
bones, spine, skull, and ribs—and abnormal postural development. Zhang et al. provide a compre-
hensive overview of the history of rickets diagnosis and epidemiology.22 Th ere were many proposed 
causes of rickets in the 1600s and 1700s, including evil spirits, the pressure of swaddling clothes, 
and miasma (again). Now, it is well understood that inadequate diet, particularly vitamin D, and 
exposure to sunlight are key causes of rickets. Zhang et al. warn of a resurgence of rickets because 
of modern day environmental and social factors such as poverty; inadequate (or restricted) diet on 
cultural or religious grounds, or because of nutrition beliefs; pollution; and child neglect.22
BIOSTATISTICAL PRINCIPLES IN EPIDEMIOLOGY
Epidemiological data are usually collected or interpreted in binary form (1 = disease is present; 
0 = disease is absent; 1 = exposure is present; 0 = exposure is absent). Epidemiological theory 
suggests that any sample (or population) can be divided into four groups: those with or without 


===PAGE 53===
28 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
disease and exposure. Th e common way of organizing epidemiological data in a population is by 
a 2 × 2 table, which includes two columns denoting disease presence (1) or absence (0) and two 
rows denoting exposure presence (1) or absence (0) (Exhibit 2.1).
EXHIBIT 2.1 
COMMON EPIDEMIOLOGY DATA ORGANIZATION: THE 2 × 2 TABLE
DISEASE
NO DISEASE
Exposed
A
B
Exposed Total
Not Exposed
C
D
Not Exposed Total
Disease Total
No Disease Total
People in Cell A are classifi ed as 1,1 (they have both disease and exposure of interest) and 
people in Cell D are classifi ed as 0,0 (they have neither disease nor exposure of interest). Th e 
people in Cell B have the exposure of interest but not the disease (classifi ed 0,1), and conversely, 
BOX 2.1
JOHN SNOW’S DISEASE OUTBREAK MAP OF CHOLERA DEATHS 
AROUND LOCAL WATER PUMPS
In 1854, a major cholera outbreak occurred in Soho in London, England. In the space of a week, 127 peo-
ple died, diagnosed with cholera. By the next week, a further 500 people had died. John Snow, who was 
also credited with breaking down religious, medical, and ethical opposition by administering chloroform 
to Queen Victoria for the births of Prince Leopold and Princess Beatrice, was called in to try to identify the 
cause of the cholera outbreak. He mapped the geography of the neighborhood, watched what people did, 
and gathered verbal evidence from anyone who would talk to him about their daily activities and those of 
their neighbors. He was seeking something that would link these cholera deaths together (he was think-
ing as an epidemiologist). An issue that emerged again and again was the water pump on Broad Street. 
All but 10 of the cases lived close to the pump, and it was their main water source. Of the 10 cases that 
did not live close to the pump, eight also used the pump. Snow mapped out the cholera deaths on the 
streets surrounding the pump to validate his thinking. This mapping was perhaps one of the most im-
portant legacies he made to future epidemiologists, the production of data to underpin his observations. 
He proposed to the local council that there was something wrong with the water from the Broad Street 
pump (not found in any others nearby), and it was a reason for the cholera outbreak. Although there was 
resistance in the council to this ﬁ nding, there was agreement to remove the pump handle, and the spread 
of cholera halted. Snow later pointed out that there was no real evidence that this action stopped the 
disease, as its incidence may have been declining. However, the end result was that the events of new 
cholera cases dramatically declined.
Source: Data from https://www1.udel.edu/johnmack/frec682/cholera/cholera2.html


===PAGE 54===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
29
the people in Cell C have the disease of interest but not the exposure (classifi ed 1,0). Th e coding 
1, 0 is refl ective of the way that early epidemiological measures were taken and recorded (Yes = 
1 = people have the disease or exposure; No = 0 = people do not have the disease or exposure). 
So if we take the example of John Snow’s cholera outbreak and drinking the water in the Broad 
Street well (Box 2.1), he may well have constructed a 2 × 2 table as follows: People in Cell A are 
classifi ed 1,1 if they have a diagnosis of cholera and a history of drinking water from the Broad 
Street well; People in Cell D would be classifi ed as 0,0 if they have neither a diagnosis of cholera 
nor a history of drinking water from the Broad Street well. Th e people in Cell B have the exposure 
of interest (they drank the Broad Street well water but do not have a cholera diagnosis; classifi ed 
0,1). Conversely, the people in Cell C have a cholera diagnosis but no history of drinking water 
from the Broad Street well (classifi ed 1,0).
Th e 2 × 2 table is a helpful tool to evaluate whether the exposure is related to disease. Specifi cally, 
it enables the calculation of the strength of association between the disease columns and exposure 
rows, which is usually expressed as relative risk or risk ratio (RR).
 
■
Th e RR is a ratio of two probabilities. Th e probability of a disease event occurring in 
the exposed group is a/(a + b) = R1, and similarly, the probability of a disease event 
occurring in the nonexposed group is c/(c + d) = R2. Th e risk of disease occurring in 
the exposed group (R1) is then compared to the risk of disease occurring in the unex-
posed group (R2). Th e ratio of these two probabilities (RR) R1/R2 is calculated as 
[a/(a + b)]/[c/(c + d)].
 
■
Although the RR is the preferable measure of the association between exposure and 
outcome because it is based on the probability of disease, it is not always possible to 
calculate directly, given the study design or analytical approach used. Th erefore, epide-
miologists may use an odds ratio (OR) to approximate the RR. Th e OR is the ratio of 
the odds of a disease event occurring in the exposed group, compared with the odds 
of a disease event occurring in the nonexposed group. Th e odds of a disease event are 
calculated as the number of disease events divided by the number of nondisease events 
(equivalent to the probability of a disease event divided by the probability of a nondis-
ease event). Odds are oft en written as P/(1 − P). Th e formula for OR is (a × d)/(b × c).
RR and OR can take on any value from 0 to infi nity. Because both measures represent a ratio, 
the value is 1.0 when the probability (or odds) of disease is exactly the same in the exposed and 
unexposed groups. Th e farther the value moves from 1, the more strongly the exposure is related 
to the disease. For example, an RR of 2.0 means that people who are exposed are twice as likely (or 
100% more likely) to develop disease compared to people who are not exposed.
If we take a very simplistic nutrition example, a population study might be concerned with 
amounts of saturated fats in a population’s diet and how this links to high blood pressure, because 
high blood pressure is the precursor for cardiovascular diseases (heart attack, stroke, etc.). Th ese 
diseases are expensive to manage in the acute and secondary health sectors, and require costly 
ongoing care for individuals and society, particularly when they infl uence the individual’s capac-
ity to work or study. If blood pressure is lowered by conservative means (for instance, decreasing 
fat intake in the diet), events of heart attack and stroke may decline and costs to the individual, 
society, and health sectors will decrease.
Epidemiology and public health are intrinsically linked because epidemiology describes the 
health of populations. Public health interventions (such as promotion of particular food, or pat-
terns of eating, or exercise interventions) are based on population-based evidence of cause and 
eff ect. For instance, epidemiological studies have shown repeatedly that people who have a high 
saturated fat intake have higher risks of high blood pressure than people who eat lower amounts of 


===PAGE 55===
30 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
saturated fat. Considering the 2 × 2 table in Exhibit 2.1, Cell A would contain the people who have 
a high saturated fat intake and high blood pressure; Cell D would contain the people who have low 
saturated fat intake and normal blood pressure; Cell B would contain the people who have a high 
saturated fat intake but normal blood pressure; and Cell C would contain the people who have a 
low saturated fat intake but high blood pressure.
Th is example raises issues of measurement, which will be discussed later, concerning putting 
appropriate “cut points” in the data to defi ne high and low and good and bad.
Confi dence Intervals (CIs)
It is essential to estimate variability (precision) of the ORs and RRs in order to determine how 
strong the association actually is. Signifi cance in biostatistics is identifi ed when 95% CIs do not 
encompass 1 (1 means no association). To calculate the CI, the log odds ratio, log(OR) = log(a*d/
b*c), is used to calculate its standard error: se(log(OR)) = √1/a + 1/b + 1/c +1/d.
Th e CI is calculated as exp(log(OR) ± Zα/2*√1/a + 1/b + 1/c + 1/d), where Zα/2 is the critical 
value of the normal distribution at α/2 (e.g., for a confi dence level of 95%, α is 0.05 and the critical 
value is 1.96). Th e ease of calculating CIs around ORs and RRs has increased exponentially with 
the advent of increasingly sophisticated soft ware in the past 30 years.
Confounding 
Not taking account of confounding can lead to spurious and incorrect associations between expo-
sure and disease. A confounder is usually associated with both the exposure and disease being 
studied, but it need not be a risk factor for the disease. Th e confounding variable can either infl ate 
or defl ate the true association, and it must be unequally distributed between subjects with and 
without disease/exposure.7
In experimental research, random selection of subjects from a known reference population and 
random allocation to study arms are undertaken largely to minimize the infl uence of potential 
confounders (i.e., theoretically, confounders have been distributed equally across study arms).23 
Th us, when testing for homogeneity at baseline, researchers are assuring themselves that before 
the intervention commences, there is no real diff erence between the cohorts allocated to inter-
vention or control arms. Th e best way to identify confounders is to undertake epidemiological 
research, where the notion of confounding is embraced and tested.
Prior to conducting an epidemiological study, a causal pathway is generally designed, con-
sisting of the exposure, the disease measure of choice, interim disease outcomes (which might 
provide alternative measures of disease), any antecedent factors that may have led to the exposure, 
and potential confounding variables (see Figure 2.2).24 In the process of designing a causal path-
way, epidemiologists can ensure that they have considered (as well as possible) the best way to test 
their hypothesis and the best measurements to take.
A number of statistical methods can be applied to control for potential confounding fac-
tors. Potential confounding factors should fi rst be identifi ed theoretically, either from fi nd-
ings of previous studies or because the factor may be considered as biologically plausible.25 A 
simple way to determine whether a variable is a confounder is to determine whether there is 
a diff erence between the crude OR and the adjusted OR of 10% of greater. To do this, research-
ers compute the measure of association for the diff erent levels of the confounder and then 
recombine the data, standardizing it by the denominator for each level of the confounder. If 
the diff erence between the crude and adjusted measures of association is 10% or more, then 
confounding is present. If it is less than 10%, then there was little, if any, confounding. Th is 


===PAGE 56===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
31
uses a data management approach called stratifi cation. Soft ware design has made testing for 
confounding very much simpler than it was 30+ years ago. Usually, potential confounders are 
fi rst identifi ed as being strongly associated with the exposure and with the disease (using OR 
calculated from 2 × 2 tables or from univariate logistic regression analyses). Th e potential 
confounder is then added to a multivariate model, which tests its infl uence on the association 
between exposure and disease. Given that the data are generally in binary form, multiple logis-
tic regression models are used and a confounder is identifi ed if it accounts for a signifi cant 
amount of variance (adjustment) in the crude association. Th e potential confounder must 
be checked in a priori biological terms to ensure that it is not a proxy for either exposure or 
disease.25 Signifi cant associations are identifi ed when 95% CI do not encompass 1. Another 
approach to identifying a confounder is to create a causal diagram, similar to the causal path-
way outlined earlier. A causal diagram, namely a directed acyclic graph (DAG), seeks to iden-
tify all causal pathways between exposure and disease and also between potential confounders 
included in the diagram. Th en, in order to identify which confounders should be included in a 
statistical model, one seeks to identify any paths from the exposure to the disease that do not 
emanate directly from the exposure itself.26
Effect Modifi cation (Interaction)
Another benefi t of examining potential confounders in subgroups of the data is that eff ect mod-
ifi cation can be detected. Th is occurs when the eff ect of an exposure is diff erent among diff erent 
subgroups and may require diff erent interventions. For instance, if women are suspected as hav-
ing a diff erent biological causal path for obesity and blood pressure than men, the association 
between obesity and blood pressure will be signifi cantly diff erent for women than for men.7 Th is 
will be shown by stratifi cation of the association between obesity and blood pressure (for women 
and for men) and testing the diff erence in ORs between the subgroups.
STUDY TYPES AND ORGANIZATION
Observational epidemiological studies may be cross-sectional studies, cohort studies, or case–
control studies.
FIGURE 2.2 Causal pathway.
Source: Data from Kirkwood BR, Sterne JC. Essential Medical Statistics. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Blackwell Science; 
2003. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2de1/78e7e19a6641d48caa0ed935743ed07d409e.pdf
Antecedent causes
Confounder
Exposure
Interim
Disease
measure 1
Interim
Disease
measure 2
Disease


===PAGE 57===
32 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Cross-sectional studies are distinguished from other types of observational studies because 
they occur at a single point in time and therefore represent a cross-section of the respondent’s life 
experience. Data for cross-sectional studies frequently come from surveys or surveillance systems, 
which collect information on a variety of health behaviors and health outcomes across members of 
a population. For example, one might be interested in knowing whether obesity is more common 
among children who live in households experiencing poverty than in households above the pov-
erty threshold. In this case, a cross-sectional study could be conducted to compare the prevalence 
of childhood obesity in households below and above the poverty threshold, adjusting for potential 
confounding factors, using data from a state or national health surveillance system.
Th e advantages of cross-sectional studies include the fact that oft en data are already collected 
and available, oft en as part of routine public health practice, and therefore these types of stud-
ies are relatively inexpensive and quick to conduct. A primary disadvantage of cohort studies is 
that the temporal (time) sequence of an exposure–disease relationship is unclear. In other words, 
because we measure both exposure and outcome simultaneously, it can be diffi  cult to determine 
which came fi rst. Th is is the primary reason why cross-sectional studies generally are not suffi  -
cient for us to make causal inference about an exposure–disease relationship. Imagine, for exam-
ple, that we are interested in understanding whether fi sh consumption infl uences the likelihood 
of being obese based on a person's BMI. We might survey people about their fi sh consumption 
and their height and weight, or perhaps even be able to use data from an existing health survey 
to make this comparison. Even if we observe that people with higher fi sh consumption tend to 
be classifi ed as obese less oft en than people with lower fi sh consumption, it would be diffi  cult to 
establish whether the fi sh consumption caused people to have a lower BMI or whether the per-
son’s BMI infl uenced the likelihood of eating fi sh. In some cases, it is possible to ask questions in 
such a way that we can be relatively confi dent that the exposure preceded the outcome. However, 
these approaches will always rely on a respondent’s memory because we are asking about his-
torical exposures, and therefore we may have misreporting in our data, which can result in mis-
classifi cation and potentially bias. Other biases that can occur in cross-sectional studies include 
sampling and selection bias (in that people may self-nominate or investigators may seek out par-
ticular types of people to participate), information bias (in terms of attenuation of information 
that is provided, which participants might perceive to be less than acceptable), and recall bias.27
Cohort studies are those in which a group of people is recruited, typically at one place or time 
point, and are divided into an exposed subgroup and an unexposed subgroup. All members of the 
cohort must be free of the disease of interest at the start so that the incidence (development) of 
disease can be compared in the exposed and unexposed groups. A cohort may be prospective, in 
which the development of disease is followed in real time, or retrospective, in which records are 
used to determine past exposure levels and follow-up for disease incidence. A cohort is potentially 
likely to have been exposed to the same type of factors (environmental, nutritional, personal) and 
to have similar risks of exhibiting (or developing) a disease.6
Th ere is no perfect way of undertaking epidemiological research or recruiting samples, prob-
ably because of the very nature of researching people! Fletcher et al. provide a list of advantages 
and disadvantages of cohort studies.6 
Advantages include:
 
■
It is the only way of establishing incidence directly.
 
■
Th ey follow the same logic as clinical questions (if a person is exposed, do they get 
the disease?).


===PAGE 58===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
33
 
■
Exposure can be elicited without the bias that might occur if outcome was already 
known.
 
■
Researchers can assess the relationship between exposure and many diseases.
Disadvantages include:
 
■
Th ey are ineffi  cient. More subjects need to be enrolled than experience the event of 
interest; therefore, cohort studies are not useful for rare diseases.
 
■
Th ey are expensive because of resources necessary to study people over time.
 
■
Results may not be available for some time.
 
■
Th ey can only assess the relationship between disease and exposure to relatively few 
factors.
A retrospective cohort study is a study in which disease is known and the exposure is hypoth-
esized. People with the disease usually come to the attention of clinicians fi rst, and when 
concerns are raised by astute clinicians that something is not right (i.e., the prevalence or pre-
sentation of the disease is unusual), epidemiologists track back in time to establish the exposure 
and to identify other cases with disease that may not have been identifi ed or in which disease 
may not yet have occurred. Th ere are many examples of retrospective cohort studies around 
the world, with a range of diseases and historical exposures, and varying periods of latency of 
disease presentation.
One area that has attracted worldwide interest is the Wittenoom study in Western Australia 
of the eff ect of blue asbestos on miners and their families living in Wittenoom during the 
period 1940–1970s. Th e fi rst case of mesothelioma in a Wittenoom worker was diagnosed in 
1960, despite fears for more than 10 years by respiratory physicians that the town’s asbestos 
industry would spawn an epidemic of serious lung disease among its workers. By the time a 
report of the late mill worker’s fatal cancer was published in the Medical Journal of Australia 
2 years later, about 100 miners and millers at Wittenoom already had serious lung damage. 
In 1975, a retrospective cohort study was instigated to identify who among the workers at 
Wittenoom were most at risk of developing lung disease and the length of time between their 
fi rst exposure to blue asbestos and when the disease was fi rst detected. Th e researchers obtained 
access to workers’ records and air quality data, and attempted to trace the 6,505 men employed 
at Wittenoom between 1943 and 1966. Armed with the names of workers (the Wittenoom 
cohort), the researchers then scoured electoral rolls, drivers’ licenses, hospital records, and 
death certifi cates to fi nd out what had happened to the men. Of the 6,200 workers whom the 
research team traced, 220 (3.5%) had pneumoconiosis, or serious lung damage, and 26 had 
mesothelioma. Sixty men had already died from respiratory cancer—nearly twice the mortality 
rate for all Western Australian males. Th e study reported a strong relationship between inten-
sity of asbestos exposure and these diseases. Th ere have been more than 50 papers published to 
date on the study, and another wave of research is now investigating women and children who 
lived in Wittenoom around this time.28–30
Th ere are many biases inherent in retrospective cohort studies, mostly relating to sampling and 
measurement. If old records are accessed (as in the Wittenoom study), data integrity or complete-
ness may be questionable. If data are missing, there may be no other source of information, par-
ticularly if “dead” cases are being counted (people who died prior to the study commencement, 
and who may have died of the disease of interest, but it may not have been diagnosed as such at 
the time).


===PAGE 59===
34 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Retrospective studies in nutrition are notoriously fl awed by recall bias in self-reporting. Recall 
bias is 
a systematic error that occurs when participants do not remember previous events or expe-
riences accurately or omit details: the accuracy and volume of memories may be infl uenced 
by subsequent events and experiences. . . . Bias in recall can be greater when the study 
participant has poorer recall in general, and when [the time interval being asked about is 
longer]. Other issues that infl uence recall include age, education, socioeconomic status and 
how important the [disease] is to the patient. [Added to this], undesirable habits such as 
smoking or eating unhealthy foods tend to be underreported, and are therefore subject to 
recall bias. Pre-existing beliefs may also impact on recall of previous events.31
Th ese studies hypothesize a (short-term) relationship between disease (poor outcome) and 
exposure such that they can both be measured within a short period of time (few hours or days); 
see Figure 2.3. An example of cause–eff ect hypotheses that might be appropriate for cross-sec-
tional cohort study design is the relationship between eating diff erent types of food at lunchtime 
(salads vs. baked dinner vs. rice vs. no lunch) on levels of energy 1 hour aft er lunch. Th is is a 
question that bothers many teachers and university professors when teaching postlunch classes to 
students who are in various states of sleepiness! One important reminder is that causality cannot 
be inferred from cross-sectional studies, so lecturers concerned that students are going to sleep in 
class aft er lunch cannot say that eating pasta (for instance) makes them sleepy.
Prospective cohort studies compile a cohort of subjects who are currently nondiseased and a 
mix of exposed and unexposed. Cohort members are then tracked for disease occurrence (inci-
dence), as some are expected to make choices or assume diff erent behaviors over time (expo-
sures), which may contribute to disease occurrence (Figure 2.3).
Prospective (longitudinal) studies usually follow cohorts for years. Th ey are expensive and 
challenging to conduct because the initial cohort needs to be tracked comprehensively to ensure 
minimal attrition and each member of the cohort needs to be reassessed regularly over time. If 
behaviors are being tracked, then the most accurate way of recording behaviors needs to be deter-
mined, and individuals in the cohort have to agree to ongoing data collection.
Th e Framingham Heart Study is an internationally known example of a prospective 
cohort study, examining cardiovascular disease occurrence in people living in Framingham, 
Massachusetts. Th e study began in 1948 with 5,209 adults, and is now on its third generation of 
participants.32 Much of the now-common knowledge concerning heart disease (for instance, the 
FIGURE 2.3 Prospective cohort study design.
Nonexposed
D–
D+
Exposed
D–
D+
Cohort at risk of
disease going
forward


===PAGE 60===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
35
impact of diet, exercise, aspirin) comes from this study. A number of cohort studies have resulted 
from this prospective study:
 
■
Th e Original Cohort: Th e fi rst cohort study began in 1948 with 5,209 participants 
ranging in age from 30 to 62. Participants were men and women with no history of 
stroke or heart attack.
 
■
Th e Off spring Cohort: Th e next cohort study began in 1971. Th e 5,124 participants 
included children of the Original Cohort patients as well as the children’s spouses.
 
■
Th e Omni Cohort: Th is cohort study began in 1994 and focused on the growing diver-
sity of the Framingham community. Th e 506 participants were recruited from diff erent 
ethnic groups.
 
■
Th e Th ird Generation Cohort: Th is cohort study started in 2002 with 4,095 of the chil-
dren of the Off spring Cohort (many of whom were also grandchildren of the Original 
Cohort participants).
 
■
Th e Omni Two Cohort: Th is cohort study started in 2003 with children of the Omni 
Cohort patients. Th ere were 410 participants, making the Omni Two Cohort approxi-
mately 10% of the size of the Th ird Generation Cohort.32
Th ere are a number of biases that can plague longitudinal studies, including loss to follow-up 
(subjects dropping out of the study), Hawthorne bias (behaviors change because of being observed), 
and measurement error (as in over- or underreporting).33 If the cohort is recruited at the same 
point in time, then chronological bias is unlikely to play a role (when study participants are subject 
to diff erent exposures or are at a diff erent risk from participants who are recruited later).31
In case–control studies, cases are known (disease is already diagnosed) and control subjects are 
chosen from people who are similar but without the disease. A case–control study aims to select 
controls who represent the population that produced the cases (providing an estimate of the expo-
sure rate in the population). Case–control studies are by nature retrospective because disease has 
already occurred in cases, and reasons for it are sought. Cases and controls are usually matched by 
factors that are considered to be potential confounders (e.g., age, gender, place of residence, socio-
economic factors). Th e feature that distinguishes case–control studies from cohort studies is that 
“cases have the outcome of interest at the time that information on risk factors is sought.”6 In other 
words, in a cohort study participants are sampled based on exposure and in a case–control study 
they are sampled based on outcome. Data collection integrity is essential in case–control studies so 
that researchers do not bias the way they elicit information. Th ey must ensure that they ask each 
study participant the same questions in the same way so as not to infl uence their responses.
An example of a case–control study that signifi cantly infl uenced hospital policy regarding edu-
cation of mothers of newborn babies was the Tasmanian Sudden Infant Death study.34 Th is was 
a population-based retrospective case–control study conducted between 1988 and 1991, during 
which time there were 62 sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) cases. Th ese cases were matched 
with babies of the same gender, date and place of birth, maternal age, and smoking status. 
Predictors of SIDS events were found to be sleeping prone, maternal smoking, a family history 
of asthma, and bedroom heating during last sleep. Protective factors were maternal age over 25 
years and more than one child health clinic attendance. On the fi ndings of this study, mothers of 
newborns were educated about placing their children on their sides or backs to sleep, no smoking, 
not heating the child’s room, and using child health clinics as oft en as possible.34
Diagnostic accuracy is essential in case–control studies so that all cases included in the study 
are based on the same diagnostic criteria. Case–control studies may be biased by reporting biases 
or errors during data collection, and there may be diff erential reporting of exposure information 


===PAGE 61===
36 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
between cases and controls, based on their disease status (recall bias). For example, in a case–con-
trol study of cancer, people with the disease may have thought more about their past diets and 
therefore report more accurately than people without disease, or they may have read about dietary 
components associated with developing cancer and therefore overreport their consumption of par-
ticular food items compared to people without disease. In either of these cases, recall bias would 
result, which could cause us to make the wrong conclusion about whether diet infl uences the risk 
of developing cancer. Other types of bias are also possible in case–control studies. Recording of 
exposure information may vary depending on the investigator’s suspicion of disease status (inter-
viewer/observer bias). Selection bias is inherent in case–control studies, in which it gives rise to 
noncomparability between cases and controls. Selection bias in case–control studies may occur 
when “cases (or controls) are included in (or excluded from) a study because of some characteristic 
they exhibit which is related to exposure to the risk factor under evaluation.”20 Th erefore, selection 
bias may occur when those individuals selected as controls are unrepresentative of the population 
that produced the cases. Selection bias in case–control studies occurs when cases and controls are 
recruited from one site (hospital, school, workplace), as people in these sites may have diff erent 
characteristics than the general population. If these characteristics are related to exposures under 
investigation, then estimates of exposure among controls may diff er from the broader reference 
population.20 Selection bias may be minimized by selecting controls from more than one source.6
Experimental studies, sometimes referred to as clinical trials, are considered the gold standard 
for epidemiologic inquiry. Unlike observational studies, experimental studies require the alteration 
by researchers of the natural history of study participants in order to test the eff ectiveness of an 
“exposure” or intervention on a disease outcome. Th ese studies are generally not conducted with-
out suffi  cient evidence from observational studies to justify such an approach.
Clinical trials, particularly drug trials, are conducted in phases designed primarily to assess 
safety,  dosage, and effi  cacy/eff ectiveness. Information gathered in each phase is used to justify 
 moving to the next phase. Phase 0 studies are exploratory in nature and are conducted in small 
groups of humans (approximately 10–20) to assess drug properties. Phase 1 studies are usually con-
ducted with healthy volunteers (approximately 20–100) and focus on drug safety, metabolism, and 
excretion. Phase 2 studies gather preliminary data in a sample of approximately 100–300 partici-
pants on effi  cacy/eff ectiveness. When appropriate, these studies may include the use of an inert sub-
stance, or “placebo,” to compare the impact on short-term outcomes. Th ese studies also assess safety.
Phase 3 studies are generally the ones that are most popular in the media and are conducted 
across a variety of interventions. Th ese studies primarily gather information from large study pop-
ulations (300 or more) to assess safety and effi  cacy/eff ectiveness by studying diff erent populations 
and levels of the intervention. Th e ideal scenario is for these studies to be conducted in such a 
manner that study participants are randomized into the intervention or placebo arms (or various 
levels of the intervention). It is also ideal for the study to be conducted, when feasible, for the 
study participants and researchers to not know which arm they are in, which is known as “dou-
ble-blinded.” For drug trials that show signifi cant effi  cacy and are approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), Phase 4 studies assess a drug’s safety, effi  cacy, and optimal use aft er they 
have been released on the market for a period of time.
Th ere are many advantages to experimental studies, including being the only true test of the 
effi  cacy of an intervention, the ability to control the exposure of the study participants to the inter-
vention and adjust for confounding factors, and to simultaneously test for safety and dosage while 
assessing effi  cacy. Disadvantages of experimental studies include excessive time and costs, limited 
external validity and the potential that there will be loss to follow-up and minimal adherence to the 
protocol by study participants.


===PAGE 62===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
37
Experimental study designs can be used in nutrition research to assess the impacts of dietary 
patterns on chronic diseases (e.g., diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular disease) and chronic disease 
risk factors (e.g., glycemic control, blood pressure, blood cholesterol). Study participants can 
be randomized to follow a particular nutritional intervention versus their usual dietary intake. 
Adherence to the study protocol can be determined through self-reported dietary intake, nutri-
tional biomarkers, and/or direct observation.35,36
Epidemiological Data
Data can be captured by a number of methods for epidemiological studies, and many studies use 
multiple forms of data capture. Th ere is usually a lot of data required to ensure that important 
associations are identifi ed and tested. Data can come from surveys (mailed, emailed, face to face, 
telephone), from registry data (for instance, chronic disease or registries, road accident records, 
hospital databases), and from objective measures captured face to face. Each method of data cap-
ture has its limitations, and before decisions are made to capture data in a particular manner, 
all possible methods should be considered. Th is may require systematic reviews of the literature 
to understand how others have captured similar data and to understand the degree of potential 
measurement error.7,24
Measures need to be valid to limit opportunities for misinterpretation of fi ndings. Th ey also 
need to be accurate, particularly because data are usually only collected once. When epidemio-
logical data were captured in the early days of its history, there was little opportunity for error in 
disease—people were either dead (1) or alive (0) or they had cholera (1) or not (0), and they had 
a defi nitive exposure (they had drunk their water from the Broad Street well (1) or not (0)). Th ese 
measures were valid and accurate and could reliably be made by another person.
However epidemiological measurements are not as simple now, and more thoughtful and 
sophisticated data capture and management may be required to ensure that people are correctly 
classifi ed as diseased or exposed. For instance, take eating behaviors. If researchers are interested 
in testing the consumption of vegetables in relation to heart disease, subjects in a study might 
be asked about usual consumption (type of vegetable, portion, daily frequency; exposure) and 
heart disease status (defi ned from pathology tests; Yes = 1, No = 0). Vegetable consumption 
might then be collated into a type–portion–frequency index (a continuous variable). “Usual” 
consumption would need to be defi ned fi rst, with a set time period (yesterday, on average in a 
week, etc.). Th e vegetable consumption index would range from 0 to the highest number (for 
people with high vegetable intake). Th is number would then need to be divided into binary 
form for analysis, particularly to be compared with heart disease outcomes (binary form; Yes 
= 1, No = 0). Th e usual way to divide continuous exposure data is to examine the distribution 
of the type–portion–frequency index, and divide it at the median value. Th e hypothesis under 
consideration would probably be that low vegetable intake is associated with heart disease (1); 
thus the risk level of vegetable intake would be the lower end of the index (coded 1). Th is means 
that the 2 × 2 table would be designed so that 1,1 identifi ed people with low vegetable intake and 
heart disease, and 0,0 identifi ed people with high vegetable intake and no heart disease. Other 
more fancy ways of identifying the appropriate cut point might be to apply an approach in which 
the exposure variable was divided into smaller portions (say tertiles, quartiles, and even quin-
tiles) and the diff erential association between exposure categories and disease was tested using 
independent exposure categories in logistic regression models.1,7 Th us, determining appropriate 
measures of dietary exposure can be complex, and much thought needs to go into data capture 
methods before the study gets off  the ground.


===PAGE 63===
38 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Similar situations may arise with capture of disease data. All the elements of the disease may 
need to be considered, in terms of chronicity of symptoms, patterns of severity (frequency, inten-
sity), and nature of symptoms. Take headache or low back pain, which can vary in presentation, 
frequency, and impact on the individual. An index of low back pain is oft en produced, and the 
same principles applied to determine low back pain occurrence that has high and low classifi ca-
tions. Oft en in situations such as this, the sample may be divided into three classifi cations: those 
with no low back pain (0) and two “diseased” groups (those with low index of low back pain and 
those with high index of low back pain). Th ree comparisons can then be made between diseased 
groups and potential risk factors (high index of low back pain compared with none; low index 
of low back pain compared with none; high index of low back pain compared with low index). 
Th is type of approach may identify diff erent causal pathways and may identify dose–response 
relationships.
CONCLUSION
Th e constructs of epidemiology must be considered prior to designing any research, as these con-
structs underpin the methods inherent in all scientifi c endeavors. Epidemiological principles pro-
vide a framework for understanding and determining best measures and ways of applying them 
and for identifying cause and eff ect on causal pathways. Epidemiological principles underpin 
not only the conduct of good research but also its reporting and the implementation of research 
fi ndings into real-world practices. Th e value of using a framework of epidemiology in public 
health nutrition is yet to be fully explored, as not only is good nutrition intrinsic to people’s health 
but it also is integral to the way people operate within their cultures and languages, their social 
structures, their familial roles, and their family economics. Th e development of epidemiological 
principles has correlated with better quality research over the past 30 years, and it has produced 
better educated and more critical researchers, healthcare providers, and policy-makers.
KEY CONCEPTS
It is important for students, researchers, clinicians, and policy-makers to understand the compo-
nents of causality and the epidemiology of nutrition when designing interventions. Th ere are dif-
ferent types of research evidence and they provide diff erent pieces of information. Th e causality of 
disease in specifi c circumstances should underpin understanding of eff ective interventions as well 
as outcome measures. It is important that end users understand the ways in which this evidence 
is produced and the limitations of each research evidence source.
CASE STUDY: 56-YEAR-OLD WHITE FEMALE PRESENTS 
WITH WORSENING OSTEOPENIA
Michelle is a 56-year-old White female. She is 5c6s tall and weighs 120 pounds (BMI 19.4). She 
is postmenopausal and is not taking hormone-replacement therapy. She is very active; she runs 
approximately 50 miles a week and also does strength training exercises. She has a history of mel-
anoma and so she tries to limit her direct exposure to sunlight. Despite her physical activity level, 
she has been diagnosed with osteopenia, which has gotten worse in recent years. Her doctor has 
advised her to spend more time outside and increase her consumption of vitamin D and calcium. 
She is reluctant to increase her sunlight exposure given her history of melanoma, and she does not 


===PAGE 64===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
39
like many foods that include vitamin D and calcium. She is also on a limited budget; so she has 
not been willing to purchase nutritional supplements.
Case Study Questions
1. 
What advice would you give Michelle to try to avoid her declining bone health?
2. 
What other concerns might Michelle consider in her overall health?
3. 
What type of study design might you use to answer the questions that Michelle might 
have to help make informed decisions about her health?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
Consider every public health nutrition issue with which you are faced, in terms of 
likely exposures (including antecedent causes) that may contribute to the disease (out-
come), and the confounders that may be at play.
2. 
Consider how you would apply observation and clinical reasoning, which are essential 
skills for every epidemiologist, and nothing is too basic or simple to consider.
3. 
Consider how individual choice and health literacy infl uence exposures and disease 
outcomes.
4. 
Identify which exposures and confounders are mutable (can be changed) and which 
are not.
5. 
Do not seek to intervene to change nutritional outcomes until you have a clear under-
standing of cause and eff ect; there is no point in applying an intervention that may not 
be relevant to the cause–eff ect model.
6. Identify the strongest exposures for disease outcomes and focus interventions on them 
for optimum eff ect.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
How might research be used to help address the impact of the SDOH and enhance 
equity in populations in various venues?
2. 
What challenges might be found in conducting nutritional epidemiological research in 
rural communities? In urban communities?
3. 
How might technology be used in epidemiological research to better enhance the 
potential to collect high-quality data?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Nutritional Epidemiology is a journal focused on nutrition research in disease prevention. https://www
.frontiersin.org/journals/nutrition/sections/nutritional-epidemiology 
Take a look at the EPIC study on the WHO website. It is one of the largest prospective studies in which 
nutritional data have been collected from over 500,000 people in 10 European countries in which 
hundreds of studies have been published demonstrating an evidence basis for existing hypotheses 
for the development of nutrition recommendations to prevent disease. https://epic.iarc.fr/research/
activitiesbyresearchfi elds/nutritionalepidemiology.php 
Review this article on the relationship between nutritional epidemiology and food policy along with those 
cited in the article. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4288279


===PAGE 65===
40 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
GLOSSARY
Clinical epidemiology: A fi eld of study that involves designing and managing clinical trials, 
maintaining disease registries, and conducting studies to evaluate the usefulness of diagnostic 
and screening tests in clinical practice.
Cohort studies: Studies in which a group of people is recruited, typically at one place, or time 
point, and is divided into an exposed subgroup and an unexposed subgroup. All members of 
the cohort must be free of the disease of interest at the start so that the incidence (develop-
ment) of disease can be compared in the exposed and unexposed groups. A cohort may be 
prospective, in which the development of disease is followed in real time, or retrospective, in 
which records are used to determine past exposure levels and follow-up for disease incidence. 
A cohort is potentially likely to have been exposed to the same type of factors (environmental, 
nutritional, personal) and to have similar risks of exhibiting (or developing) a disease.
Cross-sectional studies: Distinguished from other types of observational studies because they 
occur at a single point in time and therefore represent a cross-section of the respondent’s life ex-
perience. Data for cross-sectional studies frequently come from surveys or surveillance systems, 
which collect information on a variety of health behaviors and health outcomes across members 
of a population. For example, one might be interested in knowing whether obesity is more com-
mon among children who live in households experiencing poverty than in households above 
the poverty threshold. In this case, a cross-sectional study could be conducted to compare the 
prevalence of childhood obesity in households below and above the poverty threshold, adjusting 
for potential confounding factors, using data from a state or national health surveillance system.
Disease: Th e term “disease” is used, in epidemiological terms, as an umbrella term for a disease 
diagnosis, death, a poor health outcome (for instance, high BMI or low back pain), or problem-
atic health event (like a car crash).
Epidemiology: Th e study of health in populations. Epidemiology encompasses a set of meth-
ods by which population health (public health) and the threats to it are assessed using biosta-
tistics and monitored.
Exposure: Th e term “exposure” is used ubiquitously for any factor that may be associated with 
disease. Th ere is an array of factors, but common ones include biological, familial, chemical, 
physical, occupational, psychosocial, socioeconomic, travel, educational, cultural, and nutrition.
Public health: Th e “science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting hu-
man health through organized eff orts and informed choices of society, organizations, public 
and private, communities and individuals.”2
Social determinants of health (SDOH): Th ese relate to the health risks associated with places 
where “people live, learn, work, and play.”14 SDOH comprise people’s neighborhoods and built 
environment, economic stability, education, health and healthcare, and social and community 
contexts.15
REFERENCES
1. Kelsey JL, Th ompson WD, Evans AS. Methods in observational epidemiology. In: Monographs in 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics. Vol. 10. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1986.
2. Winslow CA. Th e untilled fi eld of public health. Mod Med. 1920;2:183–191.


===PAGE 66===
 
2. Nutrition Epidemiology Principles 
41
3. CDC Foundation. What i s public health? https://www.cdcfoundation.org/what-public-health
4. Porta M. A Dictionary of Epidemiology. 6th ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2014.
5. Joint Task Group on Public Health Human Resources; Advisory Committee on Health Delivery & 
Human Resources; Advisory Committee on Population Health & Health Security. Building the Public 
Health Workforce for the 21st Century. Ottawa, Canada: Public Health Agency of Canada; 2005.
6. Fletcher RH, Fletcher SW, Wagner EH. Clinical Epidemiology: Th e Essentials. Baltimore, MA: Wilkins 
& Wilkins; 1988.
7. Rothman KJ. Modern Epidemiology. Boston, MA: Little, Brown & Co; 1986.
8. World Health Organization. Public health surveillance. https://www.who.int/topics/public_health_
surveillance/en 2019
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Th e public health system & the 10 essential public health 
services. https://www.cdc.gov/publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html
10. World Health Organization. Gender, Equity and Human Rights. 2020. https://www.who.int/gender
-equity-rights/understanding/equity-defi nition/en
11. Whitehead M. Th e concepts and principles of equity and health. Health Promot Int. 1991;6(3):217–228. 
doi:10.1093/heapro/6.3.217
12. Ueffi  ng E, Tugwell P, Welch V, et al. Equity Checklist for Systematic Review Authors. Version 2012-10-02. 
http://equity.cochrane.org/sites/equity.cochrane.org/fi les/uploads/EquityChecklist2012.pdf
13. Oliver S, Kavanagh J, Caird J, et al. Health Promotion, Inequalities and Young People’s Health: A Systematic 
Review of Research. London, UK: EPPI-Centre, Social Science Research Unit, Institute of Education, 
University of London; 2008. http://eppi.ioe.ac.uk
14. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Social Determinants of Health. 2019. https://www
.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-of-health
15. Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Th rough 
Action on the Social Determinants of Health. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2011. 
http://www.who.int/ social_determinants/en 
16. Beauman C, Cnnon G, Elmadfa I, et al. Th e Giessen Declaration. Public Health Nutr. 2005;8(6A):783–
786. doi:10.1079/phn2005768
17. Lawrence M, Worsley A. Public Health Nutrition: From Principles to Practice. Crow's Nest, Australia: 
Allen & Unwin; 2007:512.
18. Uauy R. Understanding public health nuttrition. Lancet. 2007;370(9584):309–310. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)61145-3
19. Dictionary by Merriam-Webster. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary
20. Hennekens CH, Buring JE. Epidemiology in Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
1987.
21. Ramsay MAE. John Snow, MD: anaesthetist to the Queen of England and pioneer epidemiologist. 
Baylor Univ Med Cent Proc. 2006;19(1):24–28. doi:10.1080/08998280.2006.11928120
22. Zhang M, Shen F, Petryk A, et al. “English disease”: historical notes on rickets, the bone–lung link and 
child neglect issues. Nutrients. 2016;8(11):722. doi:10.3390/nu8110722
23. Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA, et al. Evidence-based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t. BMJ. 
1996;312:71–72. doi:10.1136/bmj.312.7023.71
24. Kirkwood BR, Sterne JC. Essential Medical Statistics. New York, NY: Blackwell Science; 2003.
25. Hill A. Th e environment and disease: association or causation?. Proc R Soc Med. 1965;58:295–300.
26. Greenland S, Pearl J, Robins JM. Causal diagrams for epidemiologic research. Am J Epidemiol. 
1999;10(1):37–48. doi:10.1097/00001648-199901000-00008
27. Yu IT, Tse SL. Clinical Epidemiology Workshop 6—sources of bias in cross-sectional studies; summary 
on sources of bias for diff erent study designs. Hong Kong Med J. 2012;18:226–227.
28. Armstrong BK, de Klerk NH, Musk A, Hobbs MH. Mortality in miners and millers of crocidolite in 
Western Australia. Br J Ind Med. 1988;45(1):5–13. doi:10.1136/oem.45.1.5
29. Berry G. Prediction of mesothelioma, lung cancer, and asbestosis in former Wittenoom asbestos 
workers. Br J Ind Med. 1991;48:793–780. doi:10.1136/oem.48.12.793
30. Reid A, de Klerk NH, Magnani C, et al. Mesothelioma risk aft er 40 years since fi rst exposure to asbestos: 
a pooled analysis. Th orax. 2014;69:843–850. doi:10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-204161
31. Catalogue of Bias Collaboration, Spencer EA, Brassey J, Mahtani K. Recall bias. In: Catalogue of Bias. 
2017. https://www.catalogofb ias.org/biases/recall-bias


===PAGE 67===
42 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
32. Mahmood L, Vasan W. Th e Framingham Heart Study and the epidemiology of cardiovascular disease: a 
historical perspective. Lancet. 2013;383(9921):999–1008. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61752-3
33. Lissner L, Skoog I, Andersson K, et al. Participation bias in longitudinal studies: experience from the 
population study of women in Gothenburg, Sweden. Scand J Prim Health Care. 2003;21(4):242–247. 
doi:10.1080/02813430310003309-1693
34. Ponsonby AL, Dwyer T, Kasl SV, Cochrane JA. Th e Tasmanian SIDS Case-Control Study: 
univariable and multivariable risk factor analysis. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 1995;9(3):256–272. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-3016.1995.tb00141.x
35. Friedman LM, Furberg CD, DeMets D, Reboussin DM, Granger CB. Fundamentals of Clinical Trials 
(5th ed.). New York, NY: Springer International Publishing; 2015.
36. Willett W. Nutritional Epidemiology (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2012.


===PAGE 68===
3
NUTRITION EPIDEMIOLOGY 
RESEARCH METHODS
ERIN BOULDIN, KAREN GRIMMER, JAMIE GRIFFIN, M. MARGARET BARTH, 
AND RONNY A. BELL
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the objective of nutritional epidemiology research.
2. Explain types of study designs that are used in nutritional epidemiological research.
3. Describe the usefulness and limitations of diff erent epidemiological study designs for re-
search in nutritional epidemiology.
4. Describe the strengths and limitations of diff erent methods of measuring diet and identify 
when specifi c dietary methods may be most appropriate.
5. Explain the statistical methods commonly used in nutritional epidemiology to analyze 
diet–disease associations.
INTRODUCTION
Nutritional epidemiology is the study of how diet aff ects health and disease in human pop-
ulations, and it is also referred to as the science of public health nutrition. Th e overarching 
goals of nutritional epidemiological research include investigation of the relationship between 
dietary and nutrition intake of a person and his or her health and/or disease risk; identifi -
cation of groups of people at risk for developing disease as a result of their dietary and/or 
nutrition intake; and development and evaluation of interventions to improve or maintain 
healthful dietary patterns. Th is chapter provides an overview of research methods employed 
in nutritional epidemiology and applied in the fi eld of public health nutrition. Methodologies 
included in the design, implementation, analysis, and interpretation of nutrition epidemio-
logical studies to evaluate the relationship between nutritional status, diet, and disease are 
reviewed. Nutrition assessment tools commonly used in conducting nutrition assessments 
and in nutritional epidemiological research are described along with some of their strengths 
and limitations.


===PAGE 69===
44 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
RESEARCH METHODS AND STUDY DESIGNS IN PUBLIC 
HEALTH NUTRITION
Current State of Play in Epidemiology
Th e science and study of epidemiology is continually evolving, with new areas of epidemiology 
emerging (such as genetics). Th e evolution of epidemiology is linked to the evolution of biosta-
tistical principles and capacities as computing capacity grows and soft ware programs are refi ned. 
Advances in epidemiology have largely occurred in conjunction with statistical soft ware develop-
ment. Th e Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) disease surveillance program, Epi 
Info, is one example; see Box 3.1.
Building the Case for Exposures Associated With Disease
Sir Austin Bradford Hill, a British statistician, proposed nine criteria to provide epidemiological 
evidence of a causal relationship between a presumed cause and an observed eff ect.1 Th ese criteria 
are immensely useful in thinking through what is known about proposed associations between 
exposure and disease so that data collection and analysis can test well-reasoned hypotheses. Th ey 
are outlined in Box 3.2.
Considering these criteria, any budding epidemiologist would understand that preparation is 
essential. Before undertaking any inquiry, researchers (including clinicians and policy-makers) 
should be aware of the literature that has been previously published in the area (preferably by 
undertaking a literature review conducted systematically and thoroughly), summarize and refl ect 
BOX 3.1
EPI INFO: EPIDEMIOLOGICAL SOFTWARE FROM THE CDC
In 1985, the CDC produced the ﬁ rst version of this groundbreaking epidemiological software to chart 
disease outbreaks, designed speciﬁ cally for clinicians, health scientists, and epidemiologists working at 
the coalface to identify exposures potentially associated with disease quickly and accurately. Epi Info 
originally used MS-DOS programming and was distributed on 5.25s ﬂ oppy discs. It would be fair to say 
that this program revolutionized epidemiological data collection and analysis and enabled epidemiolo-
gists to test cause–effect hypotheses more efﬁ ciently and accurately than ever before. Because it only 
took up a small amount of hard drive capacity and storage space, Epi Info ran easily on early computers 
and was ideal for ﬁ eld work. Epi Info supports epidemiological inquiry from data collection (questionnaire 
development, validation of data ﬁ elds, data entry, and validation of entered data) through to basic epide-
miological analysis. It also provides useful sample size calculators, and excellent tutorials in the use of 
each of its features, with worked examples. Epi Info was upgraded in 2001 to run on a Windows platform, 
and it is now in its seventh version. Moreover, Epi Info is free and regularly updated. Any budding epi-
demiologist would be advised to download a copy and use the excellent tutorials: https://www.cdc.gov/
epiinfo/support/downloads.html.
CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Source: Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Epi Info™ Story. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/
epiinfo/story.html


===PAGE 70===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
45
on what has already been reported, organize the potential causes into strengths of association 
to assess for potential size of eff ect, to determine whether all fi ndings are similarly positive (or 
negative), and to consider whether there is a dose–response relationship (the more the exposure, 
the more the disease).
One trap for young epidemiologists is deciding on what data items to collect (core [essential] 
and nice to have [optional]). Core data items are those that you must have, or else the study will 
be pointless. Optional items are those that are nice to have but that you could do without if your 
funding is limited. It is wise to learn from what others have done (and reported in the literature) 
because it is easier to replicate and build on others’ work than to potentially make the same mis-
takes that they made because you did not look for effi  ciencies.
Before undertaking any epidemiological inquiry, it is important to consider whether any 
“cause” (exposure) that you believe is strongly related to a disease (your hypothesis) can be altered 
by an intervention from an experiment. Th is type of refl ection will assist with choosing appropri-
ate study measures. More about this is discussed later; however, an example is provided in Box 3.3 
to start you thinking.
Fields of Epidemiology
As outlined in the history of epidemiology (Chapter 2, Nutrition Epidemiology Principles), this 
science had its genesis in disease measurement, and identifi cation of causes of disease, to enable 
targeted interventions that are likely to be eff ective. As techniques and methods advance, epide-
miology has diversifi ed into diff erent fi elds. Th e science of methodology (design of research and 
disease outbreak investigations) is now widely recognized, and few health teams would not have 
a member with epidemiology skills.
BOX 3.2
BRADFORD HILL’S CRITERIA FOR CAUSALITY
1. Known strength (or risk) of the causal association (What have others found about how large the 
relative risk or odds ratio is?)
2. Consistency (Has previous epidemiological research found the same relationship?)
3. Speciﬁ city (Is disease limited to speciﬁ c types of people?)
4. Temporality (Does exposure clearly precede disease?)
5. Dose/response curve (Does more exposure result in more disease?)
6. Plausibility (Does it make sense biologically, clinically, and socially?)
7. Coherence (Is the knowledge from different sources pointing in one direction?)
8. Experimental evidence (Is it possible to intervene successfully in the cause to reduce the dis-
ease?)
9. Analogy with other circumstances (Are there other situations that could be used to explain the 
cause–effect hypothesis?)
Source: Data from Hill BA. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med. 1965;58:295–
300. doi:10.1177/003591576505800503


===PAGE 71===
46 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
BOX 3.3
DETERMINING APPROPRIATE STUDY MEASURES RELATED TO POTENTIAL 
CAUSALITY
After having conducted your literature review, you believe that you have evidence that older age could be 
a strong predictor for a particular health state (such as a chronic disease). Measuring age alone (by years 
of life) in your observational study will not give you the type of answer that you can do anything with. You 
cannot stop people getting older no matter how hard you try, and no funding body is going to support this 
type of inquiry if you have collected age in years as the only age marker.
First of all, you need to think about what “older age” means, and you should identify and measure 
features of “older age” that are amenable to change so that if your hypothesis is supported by your epi-
demiological inquiry, you will have the information you need for a subsequent intervention study.
Consider what “older age” means. Is there likely to be a linear function if you compare age and chronic 
disease state (the older a person is, the more diabetes he or she has)? Is there a threshold effect? For 
instance, do people entering their 60s have more likelihood of suffering this chronic disease than people 
aged in their 50s? Do people in their 70s have more likelihood of suffering this chronic disease than 
people aged in their 60s? Does something amazing happen when someone turns 60 or 70 to increase 
their susceptibility for disease? Or is change insidious, and each year of life incurs subtle changes that 
culminate at some point in disease detection?
For instance, as people age, their metabolism may change; so age-related physiological factors might 
be appropriate to measure (perhaps blood pressure, heart rate, oxygenation, or biomarkers through blood 
tests). Another approach is that for many people, their diet changes as they age, depending on a multitude 
of factors such as appetite, ﬁ nancial capacity to purchase healthy food, dental health, physical activity, 
living arrangements, and mental health. Thus study measures of these features may be useful, along 
with age, to ensure that you have captured as much relevant information about how aging is affecting 
the individual.
Forensic epidemiology is the enginehouse of investigations mounted by disease control units 
in government health departments. Forensic epidemiologists oft en need to act quickly once a 
disease outbreak is alerted and be responsive to ways of identifying potential causes. Th ey need to 
understand the biological rationale underpinning the disease, the likely causes of this, and then 
capture accurate measures of potential causes as quickly as possible to identify the true cause and 
recommend a public health intervention to attenuate the disease outbreak. Forensic epidemiology 
truly is multidisciplinary, involving input from methodologists, statisticians, public health spe-
cialists, pathologists, biologists, community healthcare providers (particularly, general medical 
practitioners), water quality specialists, and oft en veterinarians (where animal–human transfer 
of organisms is suspected).
John Snow’s cholera outbreak investigation is a good example of early forensic inquiry and 
subsequent (eff ective) public health intervention. In forensic epidemiology inquiries, the disease 
state is usually known before the cause is identifi ed. Th e disease is usually identifi ed when its 
prevalence is higher than expected (epidemic). John Snow was called in when cholera cases were 
at epidemic proportions in Soho in 1885. Aft er his careful mapping of cases, consideration of 
local evidence, and testing his hypothesis that cholera was associated with drinking water from 


===PAGE 72===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
47
the Broad Street well, he provided evidence to the local council of the likelihood of the association 
between drinking the Broad Street well water and developing cholera. Th e local council acted by 
removing the pump handle (public health intervention), and the frequency of new cholera cases 
decreased (because of the intervention, because the outbreak was self-limiting, or because there 
were no more people available to get the disease).
A real-world example of forensic epidemiology occurred in South Australia in 1994–1995. 
Th is example changed the face of food production standards in Australia and also set legal prec-
edents for redress from disease outbreaks. Th e health crisis (hemolytic uremic syndrome [HUS]) 
resulted in the death of one 4-year-old child and the hospitalization of 24 others with HUS. Most 
of these children required dialysis, and 22 years later, many have ongoing health issues. Th e cause 
of the child’s death, as stated in the coroner’s court, was the result of eating mettwurst from a local 
smallgoods producer (the company’s name is replaced in this example as Smallgoods producer 
X) believed to contain Escherichia coli 0111. E. coli 0111 is a special gut bacterium that produces 
a potent toxin called Shiga-like toxin. It is a rod-shaped bacterium 2 μm long. It is commonly 
found in the intestines of livestock and so, potentially, can contaminate meat during the slaughter 
process. Human infection is caused usually by eating contaminated meat or dairy products that 
have not been adequately cooked or processed. Once in the intestines, the organism multiplies, 
producing a toxin and causing diarrhea. Th e toxin is also absorbed into the bloodstream and 
attacks the kidney and cells lining the small blood vessels, resulting in HUS. Th e chronology of 
the disease outbreak is summarized in Box 3.4.2
BOX 3.4
CHRONOLOGY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HUS OUTBREAK, 1994–1995
December 31, 1994: The ﬁ rst case of HUS disease is hospitalized (normally two a year, no cause for any 
public health concern).
January 16, 1995: Second and third cases of HUS reported. Public ofﬁ cers become involved as this is 
now higher than normal prevalence. Public health ofﬁ cials believe an epidemic may be occurring, and 
intensive investigations begin. Extensive data started to be collected on each patient but not enough 
information can be gleaned from children to pinpoint a single common source of infection (water, 
food, other). The initial common ingredient appears to be fritz (a form of precooked meat sausage 
eaten cold).
January 17, 1995: Sought information from Australian Paediatric Surveillance Unit on numbers of HUS 
cases notiﬁ ed from around Australia. Answer: seven in the past 6 months. A fourth case is notiﬁ ed. 
Meeting held between public health ofﬁ cials, IMVS, Agricultural Department, and WCH. Water is elimi-
nated as the possible source. Food is more likely the source. IMVS to letter-drop 700 surgeries alerting 
general practice doctors. Samples of HUS victims from homes taken. Questionnaire for interviewing 
victims drafted.
January 18, 1995: Health departments and communicable disease network notiﬁ ed nationally by this 
time. MI pathology laboratories informed and asked to send specimens to WCH for special testing. 
Minister informed. General medical practitioners informed. Fifth and sixth cases notiﬁ ed.
(continued )


===PAGE 73===
48 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
BOX 3.4
CHRONOLOGY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HUS OUTBREAK, 1994–1995 
(CONTINUED)
January 19, 1995: Calls from general medical practitioners about possible cases. Laboratory conﬁ rma-
tion that E. coli was responsible for HUS. Special testing facilities set up at IMVS for testing food samples. 
IMVS tests various meat samples including Smallgoods producer X garlic mettwurst. Fifth case (South 
Australian source) found in New South Wales. Seventh and eighth cases notiﬁ ed. Information suggesting 
some victims had consumed large quantities of fritz, burgers, mettwurst, and hot dogs.
January 20, 1995: All major hospitals asked to check whether other cases may be misdiagnosed and 
actually HUS. Press release issued warning of symptoms and warned source likely to be a meat product 
and said meat should be cooked properly. Asked general medical practitioners for prompt notiﬁ cation.
January 22, 1995: Fritz still most likely suspect. Still uncertain whether this is a coincidence or the actual 
source of contamination.
12.40 p.m. WCH suggests connection made by two families of eating same brand of mettwurst.
1.30 p.m. IMVS say blind testing showed Smallgoods producer X sample proved positive. Fritz samples 
prove negative.
1.35 p.m. Parents interviewed by public health ofﬁ cials again. Asked if Smallgoods producer X rang any 
bells. Asked where it had been bought so that it could be conﬁ rmed that was what was bought. Initial 
media coverage targeting processed meats. Another sample of Smallgoods producer X mettwurst was in 
the process of being tested and could conﬁ rm new lead the next day (Monday). (Test process takes 3 days.)
January 23, 1995: Brand names checked with histories of victims. IMVS conﬁ rms second sample of 
mettwurst has toxin late morning. Smallgoods producer X is notiﬁ ed of link with their product. Smallgoods 
producer X ceases production of all mettwurst. No further mettwurst has been manufactured. Media 
conference is called at 3.30 p.m. with acting minister Lucas in which Smallgoods producer X is named 
and particular batch of mettwurst speciﬁ ed. Smallgoods producer X inspection of premises indicates no 
product left and prohibition not required. Request for immediate recall of speciﬁ ed mettwurst. Smallgoods 
producer X ofﬁ cially indicates they are moving to remove the product from sale and agree to recall by 
means of phone and visits, as well as by advertisement in The Advertiser (the local Adelaide newspaper).
January 24, 1995: Local government notiﬁ ed of public health concerns and naming of Smallgoods pro-
ducer X and speciﬁ c mettwurst. Local government organizes ofﬁ cial notices. At the same time, Smallgoods 
producer X contacts distribution outlets. Public health ofﬁ cials meet with Smallgoods producer X. Tenth 
case hospitalized.
January 25, 1995: Communicable diseases national network teleconference. Health Commission informs 
local government to ensure speciﬁ ed mettwurst is removed from local retail outlets. Samples taken of 
mettwurst from a variety of manufacturers for testing.
January 27, 1995: Inspection of Smallgoods producer X premises. Request for all information regarding 
meat sources, quality assurance procedures and production procedures, ingredients, etc. Smallgoods 
producer X refuses until legal advice was sought. Notiﬁ cation of similar epidemic in the United States 
originating from mettwurst/salami.
(continued )


===PAGE 74===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
49
BOX 3.4
CHRONOLOGY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HUS OUTBREAK, 1994–1995 
(CONTINUED)
January 30, 1995: Public health ofﬁ cials raise concerns that not all products removed from retail outlets. 
Follow-up letter sent to local councils advising them to ensure inspection of retail premises. Further 
inquiry made regarding Smallgoods producer X. Smallgoods producer X says still getting advice.
January 31, 1995: Smallgoods producer X asks for, and gets, meeting with Smallgoods producer X law-
yers and public health ofﬁ cials. Agree to supply information only if request made in writing.
February 1, 1995: At 8.30 a.m., a 4-year-old child dies from HUS in WCH. Notiﬁ cation of 20th HUS case. 
All cases so far have been from ingestion of contaminated material prior to or on date of public announce-
ment pinpointing Smallgoods producer X source. Press conferences by WCH and Minister for Health. 
Smallgoods producer X provides some of requested information. IMVS results of testing of sample of 
meat that was claimed by Smallgoods producer X to be used in contaminated batch of mettwurst proves 
positive for E. coli responsible for HUS epidemic.
February 2, 1995: Smallgoods producer X instigates recall of all mettwurst products.
HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome; IMVS, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science; MI, myocardial infarction; 
WCH, Women’s and Children’s Hospital.
Source: From Kriven S. Media Release, Minister for Health. Adelaide. South Australia. 1995. http://www.agrifood.
info/review/1995/Kriven.html#Epidemic%20chronology%20of%20events
It took until 2017 for all legal challenges to be completed and for the ongoing health and social 
needs of the HUS survivors to be monitored and recompensed for projected lifetime health costs. 
Smallgoods producer X was bankrupted and went out of business within 12 months of the HUS 
outbreak.
Clinical epidemiology is the arm of epidemiology usually involved in designing and managing 
clinical trials, maintaining disease registries, and conducting studies to evaluate the usefulness of 
diagnostic and screening tests in clinical practice. Clinical epidemiologists will oft en be linked to 
a specifi c clinical unit in a hospital or health department, and may support clinicians and poli-
cy-makers in evidence-based clinical or policy decision-making. Th eir role is to maintain sampling 
processes (for instance, concealed allocation to treatment arms or random sampling), data integ-
rity, and accuracy in clinical trials; ensure that the unit stays up to date with currently published 
research; and to be vigilant that biases do not creep into data collection, analysis, or reporting.
Disease registries are accumulative collections of secondary data from specifi c subgroups of 
people in the population for tracking prevalence, clinical care and outcomes of conditions, surgi-
cal or medical interventions, or disease. Most high- and middle-income countries have well-es-
tablished disease registries for prevalent and potentially preventable chronic diseases (stroke, 
diabetes, coronary artery disease, asthma), and registries have been established for many can-
cers. Results of routine population screening (such as Pap smears) can be logged on registries to 
assist in surveillance of screening outcomes and population compliance.3 Registries are useful for 
postmarketing surveillance of pharmaceuticals (tracking prescribing practices, adverse events).4 
Th e number and focus of registries are regularly changing. For instance, registries have been 


===PAGE 75===
50 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
established for joint replacements (such as the American Joint Replacement Registry) and surgi-
cal procedures (for instance, New York State CABG Registry to track all cardiac bypass surgeries 
performed in the state of New York.5,6
Registries collate data on common conditions that may be amenable to wide-scale public 
health interventions (such as diabetes, stroke, heart disease), but they also can monitor rare con-
ditions that are diffi  cult to research because sampling is challenged by low prevalence (e.g., juve-
nile idiopathic arthritis [STRIVE trial, which is supported by a dedicated registry]).7 Registers 
of patients with rare conditions improve capacity to effi  ciently contact them, which assists with 
research sampling, and effi  cient dissemination of new treatment information.
Clinical epidemiologists are well placed to manage data registries as they understand sam-
pling and measurement issues, data quality, updating databases, and maintaining data integrity. 
High-quality data in disease registries is essential to ensure its believability; to maintain ongoing 
use by policy-makers, clinicians, and researchers; and to attract ongoing funding for its upkeep. 
Recruitment and data collection processes are critical to the success of a registry. To be credible, 
people listed on the registry need to refl ect as complete a sample as possible of people with the 
problem, collated from all available data sources. Data can be obtained from multiple sources 
(e.g., hospital admission registers, health insurance data, pathology tests, communicable dis-
ease surveillance processes, clinician records), and data collection processes need to be routine. 
Disease-specifi c registers oft en have inclusion and exclusion criteria, which need to be strictly 
adhered to. Ensuring that registers capture consecutive, eligible people diagnosed with specifi c 
conditions or provide particular medical interventions is challenging, and requires vigilance. We 
discuss sampling in more detail in a later section of this chapter.
Finally, clinical epidemiologists work to evaluate whether and how tests should be imple-
mented in clinical practice to identify disease. Virtually all tests have a chance of resulting in 
a false positive or false negative result. Both of these situations are potentially harmful; a false 
positive may lead to someone undergoing unnecessary procedures while a false negative would 
delay needed treatment. Th erefore, epidemiological principles are employed to design studies that 
help us determine under what circumstances the outcome of a disease is improved by conducting 
a test. Th ese studies are then used to develop recommendations like the age at which women 
should begin receiving mammograms or whether men who have a family history of prostate can-
cer should be screened for disease at a given time. Th e details of these studies and the measures 
used in them—including sensitivity, specifi city, and positive and negative predictive values—are 
beyond the scope of this chapter, but are detailed elsewhere.8
Th eoretical epidemiology is the third arm of epidemiology, which has largely been respon-
sible for advancing skills and knowledge in research methods and improving rigor of evidence 
production and reporting. Th e focus of theoretical epidemiologists is on improving the quality of 
available research evidence, translating it into practice, and implementing appropriate evidence 
for individual patient’s needs. Th eoretical epidemiologists are oft en also involved in the conduct 
and reporting of secondary evidence research (systematic reviewing, conducting meta-analyses) 
and in designing, conducting, and writing clinical practice guidelines.
ROLE OF EPIDEMIOLOGY IN INFORMING EVIDENCE-BASED 
PROGRAMS
Nomenclature
Th ere is ongoing debate in the world of theoretical epidemiologists regarding nomenclature. 
Th ere are three general terms in current use.


===PAGE 76===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
51
1. 
Evidence-based medicine (EBM): Th e well-accepted defi nition of EBM is that it is 
“the conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making 
decisions about the care of individual patients. Th e practice of evidence based med-
icine means integrating individual clinical expertise with the best available external 
clinical evidence from systematic research.”9 In the early days of the evidence-based 
practice (EBP) movement, the term EBM was used because doctors (and medicine) 
were the focus of evidence production. Nowadays, it is more common to use the term 
evidence-based practice, which recognizes the care provided by all types of healthcare 
providers.
2. 
Evidence-informed practice is a term that is being used more commonly than EBP to 
refl ect the impact of four main issues on evidence production and implementation:
 
■
Th e lack of certainty in the fi ndings of much research evidence10
 
■
Th e potential diff erences between clinicians in the way they interpret evidence and 
incorporate it into their clinical reasoning11
 
■
Th e potential for disconnect between the three traditional circles of EBP, particu-
larly the lack of congruence between research and clinician input, compared with 
what patients actually understand and/or need12 
 
■
Th e importance of considering context when interpreting evidence (what works 
in one place may not work equally well in another), an issue that is particularly 
important when developing evidence-informed policy13–15
3. 
Practice-informed research is of interest particularly to the more qualitative health fi elds 
(social work, speech and language pathology, nutrition), where there can be a prob-
lematic disconnect between available evidence, clinical practice, and patient need. It 
refl ects the translation of evidence developed from groups of people, for application to 
one person, whose needs may not be refl ected in the group from which the evidence 
was derived. Th e question commonly asked is: “To what extent is research infl uenced 
by practice?”15 Th e basic foundation of practice research is building theory from prac-
tice and not only from academia. Practice-informed research should be a combination 
of research methodology, fi eld research, and practical experience. “Th e challenge from 
practice to research is to support or provoke research to become more creative in 
understanding practice built on complexity, and to act fl exibly instead of constructing 
a paradigm suitable for research.”16
Practice-informed research is the (oft en unrecognized) approach used by clinical practice 
guideline developers to establish consensus practice or context points when there is inadequate, 
insuffi  cient, poor quality, or simply no research evidence on which to base a recommendation.17,18 
It is of note in the debate about the value of evidence that these practice points are refl ected on 
some hierarchies of evidence as the lowest ranking, termed “expert opinion.” Th is recognizes the 
value of “practice-based” information to inform current recommendations. Th ese practice points 
also fl ag areas in which research could be conducted in order to strengthen the research evidence 
base.
ASSESSING NUTRITION STATUS IN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Reasons to Assess Nutrition Status
Nutritional epidemiology studies how diet (what a person regularly eats and drinks) and nutri-
tion (the overall macro- and micronutrient composition and makeup of the diet) impact a 


===PAGE 77===
52 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
person. Th e goal of nutritional epidemiological research is to (a) investigate the relationship 
between dietary and nutrition intake of a person and his or her health and/or disease risk, 
(b) identify groups of people at risk for developing disease(s) due to their dietary and/or nutri-
tion intake, and (c) develop and evaluate interventions to improve or maintain healthful dietary 
patterns.
Nutrition Assessment in Epidemiology Studies
Choosing the type of nutrition assessment to use depends on what the researcher is studying. 
Nutrition assessment tools are categorized based on whether they capture short-term intake or 
long-term intake and whether they are interviewer-administered or self-administered.
Short-term intake assessments provide a snapshot of a person’s actual eating pattern and intake 
of certain food groups. Th is assessment type looks at a person’s daily food consumption. Short-
term intake assessments include food recalls and food records. Food recalls rely on a person’s 
memory and therefore require a trained dietary interviewer to accurately collect food and bev-
erage intake. Food recalls do not require a high literacy level. Food records rely on the person 
to record in real time all foods and beverages consumed over a 3- to 7-day period. Food records 
do not rely on memory. Food records do, however, require a higher literacy level. Th ey are also 
subject to underreporting due to miscalculation of portion sizes as well as recall bias due to inten-
tional “forgotten reporting” of some foods and beverages
Long-term intake assessments provide information on usual or average food consumption over 
time, providing information on average or habitual daily intake of a food or nutrient. Th e most 
commonly incorporated long-term intake assessment tool is the Food Frequency Questionnaire 
(FFQ).19,20 FFQs are widely used in epidemiology studies to determine long-term diet versus 
short-term dietary intakes. FFQs estimate average nutrient intake. FFQs also help determine the 
frequency of consumption of certain foods and food intake behaviors.
Interviewer-administered (direct measure) nutrition assessments involve highly trained 
researchers or interviewers to administer 24-hour recalls and FFQs.21 Th e advantage of this type 
of assessment is that it provides a more quantitative and objective measure of a person’s intake. 
Multiday 24-hour food recalls ranging from 3 to 7 days can account for an individual’s day-to-
day diet variation. Interviewer-administered assessments reduce measurement errors by verifying 
portion sizes, food brand and type, combination foods, and additional sauces or condiments. 
Th ey do not require the individual to have a higher literacy level. Disadvantages include the cost 
associated with training and employing interviewers and the requirement for coding reported 
food and drinks.21
Self-administered (indirect measure) assessments, also known as self-report, are completed 
by the person without assistance. Self-administered assessments include food records, automated 
self-administered 24-hour recall, and automated self-administered FFQ.21 Advantages of this type 
of assessment are that it is easy and fast to administer, relatively inexpensive, and less burdensome 
on the respondent. Disadvantages include random and systematic errors, recall errors such as 
over- or underreporting, failure to identify daily variations in diet, inconsistencies in measuring 
portion sizes, intentional misreporting of some foods, inability of food composition databases to 
accurately calculate intake, and the need for higher literacy.20,22,23
Self-Report Data and Nutrition Assessment
Self-report data form the cornerstone of nutritional assessment in epidemiology studies. Self-
report data are also associated with many challenges, as discussed previously.


===PAGE 78===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
53
How can we overcome these disadvantages? One current recommendation is for studies to use 
internal validation methods. For example, a study using an FFQ as the main instrument should 
also use another self-report reference instrument such as a 24-hour recall or multiple-day food 
record.20
Many self-report instruments are available for nutrition assessment. Th e National Cancer 
Institute Epidemiology and Genomics Research Program has compiled a list of evidence-based 
dietary assessment methods and dietary monitoring resources, which are available at epi.grants.
cancer.gov/dietary-assessment/resources.html.24
Biological Markers (Biomarkers) and Nutrition Status
Over the past few decades, biomarkers have been incorporated into nutritional epidemiology 
studies as an objective measure of dietary intake or indicator of nutrition status. Several stud-
ies support that biomarkers provide a source validation and accurate assessment.22,25 Biomarkers 
associated with dietary intake are compared to a person’s reported intake to help validate studies 
using FFQ and food recalls.
Biomarkers most commonly used in nutrition research measure intakes of salt, protein, sucrose/
fructose, potassium (measured through 24-hour urine samples), energy expenditure (measured 
through double labeled water), carotenoids (measured through resonance Raman spectroscopy), 
and fatty acid intake (measured through subcutaneous adipose tissue sample).19,22,25–27 Advantages 
of biomarkers are that they are easily accessible using urine, feces, blood, and tissue samples. 
Disadvantages are that there may be other factors independent of a person’s dietary intake that 
can aff ect a specifi c nutrient concentration in tissues of well-fed people.22,25
Table 3.1 summarizes the diff erent dietary assessment methods28–31
BASING PRACTICE ON BEST AVAILABLE EVIDENCE 
(WHATEVER THAT IS)
Archie Cochrane is considered to be the father of EBM.32 He promoted the notion of basing 
clinical decisions on methodologically sound research evidence rather than on opinion. He also 
proposed the importance of knowing what all primary studies in a particular clinical area have 
found fi rst (a review) before undertaking another primary study in the area. He developed and 
promoted the use of systematic searching to ensure comprehensive collection of published papers 
to answer a particular question as well as the notion of bias. His work founded current systematic 
review methods and the current philosophy of EBM.9 For many years, the randomized controlled 
trial (RCT; and systematic reviews of RCTs) was held to be the only reliable form of evidence. 
However, this has evolved as epidemiologists have realized that diff erent research questions 
require diff erent forms of evidence to best answer them, and the debate about what constitutes 
best evidence continues.
Th e term “evidence” means diff erent things to diff erent people. Sharing a common view of “evi-
dence” is essential prior to conducting any research or implementing research fi ndings. Guyatt 
et al. noted that any observation in nature comprises evidence, but it is the accuracy of inferences 
drawn about evidence that is the challenge for researchers and research implementers.33
Th e tension between prosaic evidence sources and evidence from beliefs is beautifully outlined 
in the exchange between Strephon and the Lord Chancellor in Act 1 of Gilbert and Sullivan’s 
Iolanthe, where Strephon declares that Nature has given him all the evidence he needs to support 
his claims of aff ection for a young woman through “the bees — the breeze — the seas — the 


===PAGE 79===
54 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
TABLE 3.1 DIETARY ASSESSMENT METHODS IN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES
ASSESSMENT 
TOOL
MEASURE 
(DIRECT/INDIRECT)
SHORT-TERM/ 
LONG-TERM INTAKE
PARTICIPANT 
LITERACY LEVEL
RELY ON 
MEMORY
GROUP SIZE
EXAMPLE
24-hr dietary recall
Direct
Short-term
Low
Yes
Small
Dietary record
Indirect
Short-term
High
No
Small
FFQ
Direct
Long-term
Low
Yes
Large
NHANES Food 
Frequency 
Questionnaire28
Self-administered 
24-hr dietary recall
Indirect
Short-term
High
Yes
Small or
large
USDA-AMPM29
ASA2430
Self-administered 
FFQ
Indirect
Long-term
High
Yes
Small or
large
NCI DHQ III31
ASA24, Automated Self-Administered 24-Hour; NCI DHQ, National Cancer Institute Diet History Questionnaire III; FFQ, Food Frequency Questionnaire; NHANES, National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey; USDA-AMPM, United States Department of Agriculture Automated Multiple-Pass Method.


===PAGE 80===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
55
rooks — the brooks — the gales — the vales — the fountains and the mountains cry, ‘You love this 
maiden — take her, we command you!’”52 Th e Lord Chancellor is less than convinced however 
(see Box 3.5).
Th e Canadian Health Services Research Foundation proposed a defi nition of “evidence” that 
highlights its many elements: 
Evidence is information that comes closest to the facts of a matter. Th e form it takes depends 
on [the] context. Th e fi ndings of high-quality, methodologically appropriate research are 
the most accurate evidence. Because research is oft en incomplete and sometimes contradic-
tory or unavailable, other kinds of information are necessary supplements to or stand-ins 
for research. Th e evidence base for a decision is the multiple forms of evidence combined to 
balance rigour with expedience—while privileging the former over the latter.34
Determining the most believable form of evidence continues to challenge healthcare profes-
sionals. Evidence needs to relate to the individual patient, community, or healthcare system. Th e 
critical question about evidence is its believability and applicability to specifi c circumstances.
Sackett et al. proposed the now classic model of EBM (three intersecting circles of evidence as 
the most appropriate mechanism for arriving at EBP—combining evidence from research, evidence 
from patient perspectives and beliefs, and evidence from clinician experience); see Figure 3.1.9
Satterfi eld et al. expanded this model to propose the notion of uncertainty in transdisciplinary 
EBP, within a fourth circle of local context. Th e Satterfi eld model resonates with public health 
theory and practice because it also acknowledges the many sources of evidence for which there is 
little certainty (Figure 3.2).10
The Renaissance Movement
Th ere is current questioning of the increasingly sophisticated EBP approach by the Renaissance 
Group.35 Th is group includes people who have been leaders in the EBM world for many years. 
Th is group is expressing concerns about the utility of current high-quality evidence and the grow-
ing divide among evidence, clinical practice, and what patients want. (In fact, they indicate that 
BOX 3.5
EXCERPT FROM GILBERT AND SULLIVAN’S IOLANTHE
Lord Chancellor . . . my difﬁ culty is that at present there’s no evidence before the Court that chorused 
Nature has interested herself in the matter.
Strephon. No evidence! You have my word for it. I tell you that she bade me take my love.
Lord Chancellor. Ah! but, my good sir, you mustn’t tell us what she told you — it’s not evidence. Now 
an afﬁ davit from a thunderstorm, or a few words on oath from a heavy shower, would meet with all the 
attention they deserve.
Strephon. And have you the heart to apply the prosaic rules of evidence to a case which bubbles over 
with poetical emotion?
Source: Excerpt from Sullivan A, Gilbert WS. Iolanthe, Or, The Peer and the Peri: A New and Original Comic Opera in 
Two Acts. New York, NY: J. M. Stoddart; 1882.


===PAGE 81===
56 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
research rigor is driving the separation between the research circle in the EBM model from the 
clinician and patient evidence circles.) Th is group argues that although EBM has benefi ted many 
and improved the quality of published research, it has had “some negative unintended conse-
quences.” Th e group’s concerns include:
Th e evidence based “quality mark” has been misappropriated by vested interests. Th e vol-
ume of evidence, especially clinical guidelines, has become unmanageable. Statistically 
signifi cant benefi ts may be marginal in clinical practice. Infl exible rules and technology 
driven prompts may produce care that is management driven rather than patient centred. 
Evidence based guidelines oft en map poorly to complex multimorbidity.35
FIGURE 3.1 Classic EBP confi guration.
EBP, evidence-based practice.
Source: From Sackett DL. Bias in analytic research. J Chronic Dis. 1979;32(1–2):51–63. doi:10.1016/0021-9681
(79)90012-2
Patient
preferences
Clinical
expertise
EBP
Best
available
evidence
FIGURE 3.2 Satterfi eld model of decision-making and evidence uncertainty.
Source: From Satterfield JM, Spring B, Brownson RC, et al. Toward a transdisciplinary model of evidence-based 
practice. Milbank Q. 2009;87(2):368–390. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2009.00561.x
Environment and
organizational
context
Best available
research
evidence
Resources,
including
practitioner's
expertise
Client’s/population’s
characteristics, state,
needs, values, and
preferences
Decision-making


===PAGE 82===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
57
Th is group argues for 
a return to the movement’s founding principles—to individualise evidence and share deci-
sions through meaningful conversations in the context of a humanistic and professional 
clinician-patient relationship . . . . To deliver this agenda, evidence based medicine’s many 
stakeholders—patients, clinicians, educators, producers and publishers of evidence, pol-
icy makers, research funders, and researchers from a range of academic disciplines—must 
work together.35
Th e importance of ensuring that public health nutrition targets areas of need in ways that will 
address this cannot be argued with. Th e proposals by the Renaissance Movement off er leadership 
in ensuring that all stakeholders in public health nutrition, and the epidemiological inquiries that 
underpin it, are engaged in determining what is important and how to address it.
Hierarchies of Evidence
A hierarchy of evidence helps end users to target evidence searches at the type of evidence that is 
most likely to provide a reliable answer for their question.36
Th ere are two broad types of research:
 
■
Quantitative research approaches a problem by generating measurements, using 
numeric data or data that can be transformed into numbers to which statistics can be 
applied and patterns uncovered. Quantitative data collection methods include direct 
measurement (objective), surveys, and systematic observations.3 Th ere are two types 
of quantitative study data (continuous/equal interval and categorical data). Th ere is no 
one agreed hierarchy for qualitative or quantitative research.
 
■
Qualitative research is exploratory research used to gain understanding of the way 
people feel and behave. It provides insights into a problem or helps to uncover trends 
in thought and opinions. Qualitative data collection methods vary using unstructured 
or semistructured techniques such as interviews, focus groups (group discussions), and 
participation/observations.37 Qualitative data is derived from analysis of documents 
and is presented as words, phrases, themes, and exemplar quotations. Th ere is no 
agreed hierarchy of evidence for qualitative or quantitative research.
Considering quantitative evidence, the historical EBM research largely dealt with intervention 
(treatment) studies because that is what doctors did (treat). Th e EBM theory proposed that RCTs 
provide the most believable evidence of eff ectiveness from primary studies. Th is hierarchy of evi-
dence traditionally put the least biased evidence source at the top and the most biased source at 
the bottom. RCT designs are preferred because they attempt to minimize biases by randomizing 
selection of samples from reference populations and then randomizing and concealing allocation 
of subjects to study groups (see Figure 3.3). Systematic reviews and (if possible) meta-analyses of 
RCTs provide the most believable form of secondary evidence (evidence synthesis).
In the past few years, there has been an increasing recognition that diff erent research ques-
tions and approaches require diff erent hierarchies of evidence. For instance, an RCT might 
provide the best evidence for an intervention question, but it does not provide the best evi-
dence for an epidemiological question. Th e Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine has 
been at the forefront of redesigning hierarchies of evidence. In 2009, this group proposed fi ve 
diff erent hierarchies of evidence relative to the research question: therapy/prevention, etiology/
harm; prognosis; diagnosis; diff erential diagnosis, symptom prevalence; economic and decision 
analysis.


===PAGE 83===
58 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Recently, the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine revised its hierarchy of quantitative 
evidence, considering study designs relevant to clinician questions (www.cebm.net/wp-content/
uploads/2014/06/CEBM-Levels-of-Evidence-2.1.pdf).
Nearly 25 years aft er this paper, the debate about best evidence in healthcare continues, 
and there remains little certainty about the best evidence upon which to make best healthcare 
decisions. In many ways, not much has changed since the 1999 BMJ Christmas spoof paper, in 
which Isaacs and Fitzgerald proposed seven alternative sources of evidence when none is avail-
able from research: “Eminence based medicine, Vehemence based medicine, Eloquence based 
medicine, Providence based medicine, Diffi  dence based medicine, Nervousness based medicine, 
Confi dence based medicine”.38 Th is article appeared to resonate with many evidence skeptics, and 
in one of the several commentaries that subsequently appeared, an alternative evidence hierarchy 
was proposed that potentially refl ects the ways that many healthcare decisions are made.
Class 0: Th ings I believe
Class 0a: Th ings I believe despite the available data
Class 1: Randomised controlled clinical trials that agree with what I believe
Class 2: Other prospectively collected data
Class 3: Expert opinion
Class 4: Randomised controlled clinical trials that don’t agree with what I believe
Class 5: What you believe that I don’t39
FIGURE 3.3 Traditional experimental hierarchy of evidence.
RCT, randomized controlled trial.
Source: From Yetley EA, MacFarlane AJ. Options for basing Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) on chronic disease 
endpoints: report from a joint US-/Canadian-sponsored working group. Am J Clin Nutr. 2017;105(1):249S–285S. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.116.139097
Randomized
controlled trials
Cross-sectional studies, surveys
Mechanistic studies
Case reports, case studies
Case–control studies
Cohort studies
Higher
Lower
Quality of
evidence
Lower
Higher
Risk of bias
Systematic reviews and
meta-analyses of RCTs
Editorials, expert opinion


===PAGE 84===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
59
Qualitative research is used relatively infrequently, at the moment, in epidemiological research. 
Qualitative research methods have been described as fi ve diff erent types, each with a diff erent 
purpose, and with diff erent underpinning frameworks and methods (see Table 3.2).40
Th ere is unresolved debate as to whether qualitative designs should be placed into a hierarchy 
of evidence because bias management is quite diff erent for qualitative studies, compared with 
quantitative studies.37 It is not within the remit of this chapter to enter into this debate, but for 
comparison with the quantitative hierarchies, we report a qualitative hierarchy proposed by Daly 
et al.; see Figure 3.4.41
TABLE 3.2 COMMON QUALITATIVE RESEARCH DESIGNS
METHOD
FOCUS
SAMPLE SIZE
DATA COLLECTION
Ethnography
Context or culture
—
Observation and interviews
Narrative
Individual experience and 
sequence
1 to 2
Stories from individuals and 
documents
Phenomenological
People who have experi-
enced a phenomenon
5 to 25
Interviews
Grounded theory
Develop a theory 
grounded in fi eld data
20 to 60
Interviews, then open and 
axial coding
Case study
Organization, entity, indi-
vidual, or event
—
Interviews, documents, 
reports, observations
Source: From Sauro J. Qualitative Research. 2015. https://measuringu.com/qual-methods
FIGURE 3.4 Qualitative hierarchy of evidence.
Source: From Daly J, Willis K, Small R, et al. A hierarchy of evidence for assessing qualitative health research. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 2007;60:43–49. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2006.03.014
Level I
Generalizable
studies
Level IV
Single case study
Level III
Descriptive studies
Level II
Conceptual studies


===PAGE 85===
60 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Mixed Methods Research
It is likely, with the increasing recognition by methodologists of the diff erent information derived 
from qualitative and quantitative studies, that epidemiological research will include more mixed 
methods (or multimethods) research. Th is is where quantitative and qualitative studies are 
designed to understand diff erent aspects of the research question, and the data is combined to 
comprehensively provide answers.42 Th ere are three ways that mixed methods research has been 
described.31
 
■
Explanatory sequential design: An explanatory sequential design emphasizes quantita-
tive analysis, which we follow with interviews or observation (qualitative measures) to 
help explain quantitative fi ndings.43
 
■
Exploratory sequential design: An exploratory sequential design starts with qualitative 
research and then uses insights gained to frame the design and analysis of the subse-
quent quantitative component. Th is approach is commonly used to develop question-
naire items and wording.43
 
■
Convergent parallel design: Collect qualitative data and quantitative data simulta-
neously and independently, and then combine the results at the analysis phase. Th e 
analysis gives equal weighting to the diff erent types of data collected in each study, and 
comparisons are made between the data fi ndings to identify patterns, continuity, or 
contradictions.
Mixed methods is a research area that has much to off er future epidemiological research, and 
it has particular relevance to nutrition research, given the importance of understanding people’s 
choices and the barriers to good nutrition.44
Quality Reporting and Checklists
As a result of advances in theoretical epidemiological principles, a number of international orga-
nizations have emerged, which are engaged in, and promote, such activities including Cochrane 
Collaboration (us.cochrane.org); Campbell Collaboration (campbellcollaboration.org); World 
Health Organization (WHO; www.who.int/publications/guidelines/en); and National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE; www.nice.org.uk).
Advances in theoretical epidemiological methods have led to the production of resources such 
as checklists for researchers to ensure that biases are accounted for in the design and reporting 
of studies (EQUATOR Network [Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research]; 
www.equator-network.org). Th is repository includes regularly updated checklists for the conduct 
of diff erent study designs (systematic reviews [PRISMA], experimental studies [CONSORT]; 
observational [epidemiological] studies [STROBE], study protocols [SPIRIT, PRISMA-P]; diag-
nostic/prognostic studies [STARD, TRIPOD]; case reports [CARE]; clinical practice guidelines 
[AGREE, RIGHT]; qualitative research [SRQR, COREQ]; quality improvement studies [SQUIRE] 
and economic evaluations [CHEERS]).
Critical appraisal of methods and reporting of studies is also recommended for end users 
(clinicians, policy-makers, funders). A range of critical appraisal tools has been developed to 
assist end users, including design-specifi c tools in the Critical Appraisal Skills Program (CASP), 
Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro) designed for RCTs, and the McMaster University 
generic qualitative and quantitative tools.45–47
Th e purpose of author checklists is to improve the quality of research conduct and reporting 
and ensure that biases are managed as best as possible. Th e purpose of reader checklists is to 


===PAGE 86===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
61
use reading time wisely and to identify the best quality (least biased) evidence to translate into 
clinical practice. Sackett, one of the early leaders of the EBP movement, wrote a seminal paper 
in 1979 on biases that could impact on the quality of quantitative research. Th is work became 
the fi rst draft  of a catalog of biases “which may distort the design, execution, analysis and inter-
pretation of research.”48 In this paper, Sackett cataloged 35 biases that arise in sampling and 
measurement, in the context of clinical trials, and listed 56 biases potentially aff ecting case–
control and cohort studies. He proposed the continued development of an annotated catalog 
of bias as a priority for research, the challenge of which has been taken on by the Catalogue 
of Bias Collaboration at the Oxford Centre for Evidence Based Medicine (see www.cebm.net/
wp-content/uploads/2014/06/CEBM-Levels-of-Evidence-2.1.pdf).49 Th is group’s website pro-
vides information on how to detect and attenuate the eff ect of biases, with the most commonly 
viewed biases to date being detection bias, ascertainment bias, attrition bias, confounding by 
indication, observer bias, recall bias, perception bias, selection bias, misclassifi cation bias, and 
confounding.
CONCLUSION
Nutritional epidemiology has made a tremendous contribution to our understanding of the rela-
tionships between diet and disease. Th e future of nutritional epidemiology is bright, yet it has 
some challenges. However, with a comprehensive understanding of the discipline along with the 
strengths and limitations of nutrition assessment and research methodologies, key insights on 
diet and health outcomes can be obtained, resulting in improved dietary recommendations to 
reduce disease risk. Overall, nutritional epidemiology has made important contributions to the 
development of general dietary recommendations and guiding nutrition policy related to diet and 
health.
KEY CONCEPTS
 
■
Nutritional epidemiology: the study of how diet aff ects health and disease.
 
■
Nutritional status: process managed by the intake and utilization of nutrients in an 
individual. When bodily needs are met, it is referred to as normal nutritional status. If 
there is a lack or excess of nutrients or reduced utilization resulting in an imbalance, it 
is referred to as malnutrition.
 
■
Nutrition assessment: the interpretation of subjective and objective data to assess 
nutritional status. Data collected include anthropometrics, biochemical, clinical obser-
vations, and dietary assessment results to determine the adequacy of nutrition intake 
in individuals and populations.
 
■
Dietary guidelines: demonstration of healthy eating guidelines for promoting health 
and reducing disease.
 
■
Quantitative research: method of collecting objective measurements and statistical 
analysis of data obtained through surveys and questionnaires used to quantify opin-
ions, attitudes, and behaviors.
 
■
Qualitative research: method of observation to collect non-numeric data. The 
three common types of qualitative research methods include observation, 
in-depth interviews, and focus groups used to gain understanding of opinions and 
trends.


===PAGE 87===
62 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
 
■
Mixed methods research: method for conducting research that integrates collecting 
and analyzing data from quantitative and qualitative research.
 
■
Evidence-based practice: collecting, processing, and implementing research fi ndings to 
improve clinical care. Information based on sound research and not on opinion.
CASE STUDY: ASSESSING POTENTIAL FACTORS OF 
INCREASING PREVALENCE OF ASTHMA IN CAMEROON 
THROUGH A VALIDATED FOOD FREQUENCY 
QUESTIONNAIRE
Th e Cameroon Ministry of Health is responsible for maintenance of all public health services in 
Cameroon. Respiratory health is a signifi cant health concern among Cameroonian children (~6%), 
and the Ministry of Health has identifi ed an increasing prevalence of asthma among children in both 
urban and rural areas over the past two decades. Th e ministry is interested in looking at respiratory 
health (asthma) and diet as a protective factor among children (6–7 years old). Th ey have proposed 
initiating a prospective longitudinal cohort study of children (6–7 years old). You have been asked 
to consult on the development of an FFQ for assessing dietary intakes at baseline in the children. 
A validated FFQ does not currently exist in this country. Even though you may not agree with the 
selection of the FFQ as the dietary assessment tool, it is all that the Ministry of Health can aff ord at 
this time. Th us, you are tasked with the development of an FFQ for this country to assess dietary 
intakes and estimate energy and nutrient intakes of the children and design a study to validate it. 
Case Study Questions
1. 
Conduct a brief review of the literature and discuss the following:
a. 
FFQs as a successful dietary assessment instrument for examining the relation-
ships between health and diet
b. Appropriateness of an FFQ as the primary dietary assessment instrument in large, 
prospective studies
2. 
Develop a proposal for how you will develop the FFQ for this country and a study to 
validate it that includes the following:
a. 
Design of the FFQ instrument
i. Selection of the type of FFQ (see National Cancer Institute website for 
additional insights on FFQs: dietassessmentprimer.cancer.gov/profi les/
questionnaire)
ii. Consider any seasonal or regional diff erences in food availability and access 
in this country 
iii. Instrument that provides measures of the major antioxidant nutrients, zinc, 
vitamin D, and other nutrients to support respiratory health outcomes 
(reducing risk for infections, wheezing, asthma) in this age group
b. Design of the study to validate the FFQ instrument 
i. Review the literature on study designs for validating FFQs (e.g., National 
Cancer Institute website : dietassessmentprimer.cancer.gov/profi les/question-
naire/validation.html)


===PAGE 88===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
63
ii. Compare and contrast FFQ validity studies based on objective biomarker 
recovery studies versus the second class of validity studies based on com-
parison of the FFQ results with other self-reported instruments such as the 
24-hour recall 
iii. Describe the study design that you propose along with the method of data 
analysis
c. 
Share your proposals
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
Dietary assessment research methodologies: Satija et al. reported that 
[t]he exposure of interest in nutritional epidemiology is human diet, which 
is a complex system of interacting components that cumulatively aff ect health. 
Consequently, nutritional epidemiology constantly faces a unique set of chal-
lenges and continually develops specifi c methodologies to address these. 
Misunderstanding these issues can lead to the nonconstructive and sometimes 
naive criticisms we see today.50 
 
Review the article (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4288279) and prepare the 
following: summarize three key points on how we can reliably measure dietary intakes 
in populations; outline the set of strengths and limitations unique to each method to 
make it appropriate for use in specifi c applications.
2. 
Portion size estimation aids (PSEAs) for assessment of nutrient intake and dietary 
composition: Schnefk e et al. reported that 
[c]urrent dietary recall methods used in low-resource settings are prone to errors 
in portion size estimation. Th is study investigated the preference for, ease of 
use perceptions, and accuracy of visual variables in portion size estimation aids 
(PSEAs) for dietary recall in Malawi. Visual variables tested included food shapes 
compared with photos, number of portion size options, photo angle, and simulta-
neous compared with sequential portion size image presentation.51 
 
Review the article (academic.oup.com/cdn/article/2/11/nzy045/5048991) and prepare 
the following: your response to the results of participant preference and ease of use 
perceptions across photos, photo angles, and simultaneous presentation of the PSEAs 
among the Malawi community members; which PSEAs provided a more accurate 
portrayal of the actual gram weight of the meal; and how you believe the use of PSEAs 
could be optimized to improve participant’s experiences and enhance the accuracy of 
the dietary recall.
3. 
Complete a 24-hour recall, a diet record, an FFQ, and a fruit/vegetable screener found at:
a. 
Automated web-based 24-hour recall: https://deets.feedreader.com/asa24demo
.westat.com (input at least two meals)
b. Diet record/diary: use format shown here: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/educational/
lose_wt/eat/diary.htm (input at least one large meal, noting ingredients in as much 
detail as possible [oils, condiments, etc.])


===PAGE 89===
64 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
c. 
Food frequency questionnaire (the NCI Diet History Questionnaire III): https://
epi.grants.cancer.gov/dhq3/ Th en go to the DHQ III Web Demo https://www
.dhq3.org/study/demo/ (complete in full)
d. F&V screener: riskfactor.cancer.gov/diet/screeners/fruitveg/allday.pdf (complete 
in full)
4. 
Review selected topics of interest in the Nutrition Evidence Library (www.nel.gov).
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
Why is nutritional epidemiological research important in infl uencing life expectancy 
and disease prevalence?
2. 
What are some of the primary strengths and weakness of the various types of dietary 
assessment instruments used in nutrition epidemiology research?
3. 
What are some of the diff erent types of studies that public health nutritionists use to 
study diet–disease relationships?
4. 
Exploring the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES; at www.
cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/about_nhanes.htm), how does the primary research method 
diff er from other large, population-based studies? 
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Nutritional Epidemiology. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/nutrition/sections/nutritional-epidemiology
Illner AK, Freisling H, Boeing H, et al. Review and evaluation of innovative technologies for measuring diet 
in nutritional epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol. 2012;41(4):1187–1203. doi:10.1093/ije/dys105.
Th ompson FE, Subar AF. Dietary assessment methodology. In: Coulston AM, Boushey CJ, Ferruzzi MG, 
Delahanty LM, eds. Nutrition in the Prevention and Treatment of Disease. 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier; 
2017:5–30.
Scagliusi FB, Polacow VO, Artioli GA, et al. Selective underreporting of energy intake in women: magnitude, 
determinants, and eff ect of training. J Am Diet Assoc. 2003;103(10):1306–1313. doi:10.1016/s0002-
8223(03)01074-5.
Boeing H. Nutritional epidemiology: new perspectives for understanding the diet-disease relationship? Eur 
J Clin Nutr. 2013;67(5):424–429. doi:10.1038/ejcn.2013.47.
Willett W. Nutritional Epidemiology. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2012.
Stote KS, Radecki SV, Moshfegh AJ, et al. Th e number of 24 h dietary recalls using the US Department of 
Agriculture’s automated multiple-pass method required to estimate nutrient intake in overweight and 
obese adults. Public Health Nutr. 2011;14:1736–1742. doi:10.1017/S1368980011000358.
Diep CS, Hingle M, Chen TZ, et al. A validation study of the Automated Self-Administered 24-Hour Dietary 
Recall for Children (ASA24-Kids) among 9 to 11-year-old youth. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2015;115(10):1591–
1598. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2015.02.021.
GLOSSARY
Clinical epidemiology: Designing and managing clinical trials, maintaining disease registries, and 
conducting studies to evaluate the usefulness of diagnostic and screening tests in clinical practice.
Cohort studies: Studies in which a group of people is recruited, typically at one place, or time 
point, and is divided into an exposed subgroup and an unexposed subgroup. All  members 


===PAGE 90===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
65
of the cohort must be free of the disease of interest at the start so that the incidence (devel-
opment) of disease can be compared in the exposed and unexposed groups. A cohort may 
be prospective, in which the development of disease is followed in real time, or retrospec-
tive, in which records are used to determine past exposure levels and follow-up for disease 
incidence. A cohort is potentially likely to have been exposed to the same type of factors 
(environmental, nutritional, personal) and to have similar risks of exhibiting (or developing) 
a disease.
Disease: Th e term “disease” is used, in epidemiological terms, as an umbrella term for a disease 
diagnosis, death, a poor health outcome (for instance, high body mass index or low back pain), 
and problematic health event (like a car crash).
Epidemiology: Th e study of health in populations. Epidemiology encompasses a set of meth-
ods by which population health (public health) and the threats to it are assessed using biosta-
tistics and monitored.
Exposure: A term used ubiquitously for any factor that may be associated with disease. Th ere 
is an array of factors, but common ones include biological, familial, chemical, physical, occupa-
tional, psychosocial, socioeconomic, travel, educational, cultural, and nutrition.
Forensic epidemiology: Forensic epidemiologists oft en need to act quickly once a disease out-
break is alerted and be responsive to ways of identifying potential causes. Th ey need to un-
derstand the biological rationale underpinning the disease, the likely causes of this, and then 
capture accurate measures of potential causes as quickly as possible to identify the true cause, 
and recommend a public health intervention to attenuate the disease outbreak. Forensic epi-
demiology truly is multidisciplinary, involving input from methodologists, statisticians, public 
health specialists, pathologists, biologists, community healthcare providers (particularly, gen-
eral medical practitioners), water quality specialists, and oft en veterinarians (where animal–
human transfer of organisms is suspected).
Mixed methods research: Quantitative and qualitative studies are designed to understand dif-
ferent aspects of the research question, and the data are combined to comprehensively provide 
EBM.
Nutrition assessment: An evaluation of both subjective and objective data to provide an as-
sessment of a population’s nutritional status. Data collected can include dietary intake, bio-
chemical results, anthropometric measures, and clinical observations related to nutrient de-
fi ciencies.
Nutrition epidemiology: Th e approach to studying the relationship between nutrition and 
disease in human populations. Th is approach has primarily focused on dietary intake and dis-
ease. However, it can involve the classic areas of nutrition assessment including dietary intake, 
biochemical, anthropometric, and clinical parameters. Th is has also been referred to as the 
science of public health nutrition.
Qualitative research: Exploratory research used to gain understanding of the way people feel 
and behave. It provides insights into a problem or helps to uncover trends in thought and 
opinions. Qualitative data collection methods vary using unstructured or semistructured tech-
niques such as interviews, focus groups (group discussions), and participation/observations. 
Qualitative data are derived from analysis of documents and are presented as words, phrases, 
themes, and exemplar quotations.


===PAGE 91===
66 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Quantitative research: Studies a problem by generating measurements, using numeric data 
or data that can be transformed into numbers to which statistics can be applied and patterns 
uncovered. Quantitative data collection methods include direct measurement (objective), sur-
veys, and systematic observations.. Th ere are two types of quantitative study data (continuous/
equal interval and categorical data). Th ere is no one agreed-upon hierarchy for qualitative or 
quantitative research.
Th eoretical epidemiology: Largely responsible for advancing skills and knowledge in research 
methods and improving rigor of evidence production and reporting. Th e focus is on improving 
the quality of available research evidence, translating it into practice, and implementing appro-
priate evidence for individual patient’s needs.
REFERENCES
1. Hill BA. Th e environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc Med. 1965;58:295–300. 
doi:10.1177/003591576505800503
2. Kriven S. Media Release, Minister for Health. Adelaide. South Australia; 1995; http://www.agrifood.info/
review/1995/Kriven.html#Epidemic%20chronology%20of%20events
3. National Guideline Clearinghouse | Guideline Synthesis: Screening for Cervical Cancer. https://
elbiruniblogspotcom.blogspot.com/2012/01/national-guideline-clearinghouse_4960.html
4. McNeil, JJ; Piccenna, L; Ronaldson, K; et al. Th e value of patient-centered registries in Phase IV Drug 
Surveillance. Pharm Med. 2010;24(5):281–288. doi:10.1007/bf03256826
5. American Joint Replacement Registry. Improving Orthopaedic Care Th rough Data. 2016. ajrr.net.
6. Hannan EL, Racz MJ, Walford G, et al. Long-term outcomes of coronary-artery bypass graft ing versus 
stent implantation. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(21):2174–2183. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa040316
7. Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) Registry (STRIVE). U.S. National Library of Medicine. 2008. https://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT00783510
8. Weiss NS. Clinical Epidemiology: Th e Study of the Outcome of Illness. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press; 2006.
9. Sackett DL. Bias in analytic research. J Chronic Dis. 1979;32(1–2):51-63. doi:10.1016/0021-9681(79).
90012-2
10. Satterfi eld JM, Spring B, Brownson RC, et al. Toward a transdisciplinary model of evidence-based 
practice. Milbank Q. 2009;87(2):368–390. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2009.00561.x
11. Seidel BM, Campbell S, Bell E. Evidence in clinical reasoning: a computational linguistics analysis of 
789,712 medical case summaries 1983–2012. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2015;15:19. doi:10.1186/
s12911-015-0136-8
12. Elwyn G, Edwards A, Th ompson R, eds. Shared Decision Making in Health Care: Achieving Evidence 
Based Patient Choice. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2016.
13. Bowen S, Zwi AB. Pathways to “evidence-informed” policy and practice: a framework for action. PLoS 
Med. 2005;2(7):e166. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0020166
14. Rycroft ‐Malone J. Evidence‐informed practice: from individual to context. J Nurs Manag. 2008;16:404–
408. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2834.2008.00859.x
15. Shanahan JO, Liu X, Manak J, et al. Research-informed practice, practice-informed research: the 
integral role of undergraduate research in professional disciplines. Counc Undergrad Res. 2015;35(4):
6–16.
16. Uggerhøj L. What is practice research in social work—defi nitions, barriers and possibilities. Social Work 
Soc. 2011;9(1):45–59. https://www.socwork.net/sws/article/view/6
17. Kredo T, Bernhardson S, Young T, et al. Guide to clinical practice guidelines: the current state of play. 
Int J Qual Health Care. 2016;28(1):122–128. doi:10.1093/intqhc/mzv115
18. Grimmer K, Dizon JM, Louw AQ, et al. South African Guidelines Excellence (SAGE): effi  cient, 
eff ective and unbiased clinical practice guideline teams. S Afr Med J. 2016;106(5):440–441. doi:10.7196/
SAMJ.2016.v106i5.10770


===PAGE 92===
 
3. Nutrition Epidemiology Research Methods 
67
19. Freedman L, Commins J, Moler J, et al. Pooled results from 5 validation studies on dietary self-report 
instruments using recovery biomarkers for energy and protein intake. Am J Epidemiol. 2014;180:172–
188. doi:10.1093/aje/kwu116
20. Freedman L, Commins J, Willet W, et al. Evaluation of the 24-hour recall as a a reference instrument 
for calibrating other self-report instruments in nutritional cohort studies: evidence from the validation 
studies pooling project. Am J Epidemiol. 2017;186:73–82. doi:10.1093/aje/kwx039
21. Th ompson F, Dixit-Joshi S, Potischman N, et al. Comparison of eninterviewer-administered and 
automated self-administered 24-hour dietary recalls in 3 diverse integrated health systems. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2015;181:970–978. doi:10.1093/aje/kwu467
22. Brennan L, Hu F. Metabolomics-based dietary biomarkers in nutritional epidemiology—current status 
and future opportunities. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2019;63:1701064. doi:10.1002/mnfr.201701064
23. Naska A, Lagiou A, Lagiou P. Dietary assessment methods in epidemiological research: current state of 
the art and future prospects. F1000Research. 2017;6:926. doi:10.12688.f1000research.10703
24. National Institute of Health, National Cancer Institute. Dietary Assessment Research Resources. 2018. 
https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/dietary-assessment/resources.html
25. Jenab M, Slimani N, Bictash M, et al. Biomarkers in nutritional epidemiology: applications, needs and 
new horizons. Hum Genet. 2009;125:507–525. doi:10.1007/s00439-009-0662-5
26. Bingham S. Biomarkers in nutritional epidemiology. Public Health Nutr. 2002;5:821–827. doi:10.1079/
PHN2002368
27. Mayne S, Cartmel B, Scarmo S, et al. Noninvasive assessment of dermal carotenoids as a biomarker of 
fruit and vegetable intake. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;92:794–800. doi:10.3945/ajcn.2010.29707
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. NHANES Food Frequency Questionnaire. 2004. https://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/nhanes_03_04/tq_fpq_c.pdf
29. U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service. USDA Automated Multiple-Pass Method. 
2016. https://www.ars.usda.gov/northeast-area/beltsville-md-bhnrc/beltsville-human-nutrition
-research-center/food-surveys-research-group/docs/ampm-usda-automated-multiple-pass-method
30. National Institute of Health National Cancer Institute. Automated Self-Administered 24-Hour (ASA24) 
Dietary Assessment Tool. 2019. https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/asa24
31. National Institute of Health National Cancer Institute. Diet History Questionnaire III (DHQ III). 2019. 
https://epi.grants.cancer.gov/dhq3/index.html
32. Cochrane AL. Eff ectiveness and Effi  ciency: Random Refl ections on Health Services. London, UK: Nuffi  eld 
Provincial Hospitals Trust; 1973.
33. Guyatt GH, Haynes RB, Jaeschke RZ, et al. Users’ guides to the medical literature: XXV. Evidence-based 
medicine: principles for applying the users’ guides to patient care. Evidence-Based Medicine Working 
Group. JAMA. 2000;284(10):1290–1296. doi:10.1001/jama.284.10.1290
34. Canadian Health Services Research Foundation. Annual Report 2005. Ottawa, Canada: Canadian Health 
Services Research Foundation; 2005:9. https://www.cfh i-fcass.ca/Migrated/PDF/AnnualReports/
2005_e.pdf
35. Greenhalgh T, Howick J, Maskrey N, Evidence Based Medicine Renaissance Group. Evidence-based 
medicine: a movement in crisis? Br Med J. 2014;348:g3725. doi:10.1136/bmj.g3725
36. Howick J, Chalmers I, Glasziou P, et al. Explanation of the 2011 Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based 
Medicine (OCEBM) Levels of Evidence (Background Document). Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based 
Medicine. 2016; https://www.cebm.net/index.aspx?o=5653
37. Patton MQ. Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods: Integrating Th eory and Practice. Th ousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2014.
38. Isaacs D, Fitzgerald D. Seven alternatives to evidence based medicine. Br Med J. 1999;319:1618. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7225.1618
39. Mariotto A. Alternatives to evidence based medicine. Br Med J. 2000;321:239. doi:10.1136/bmj.321
.7255.239
40. Sauro J. Qualitative Research. 2015. https://measuringu.com/qual-methods.
41. Daly J, Willis K, Small R, et al. A hierarchy of evidence for assessing qualitative health research. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 2007;60:43–49. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2006.03.014
42. Johnson RB, Onwuegbuzie AJ. Mixed methods research: a research paradigm whose time has come. 
Educ Res. 2004;33(7):14–26. doi:10.3102/0013189x033007014


===PAGE 93===
68 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
43. Sauro J. 3 Ways to Combine Quantitative and Qualitative Research. 2015. https://measuringu.com/mixing
-methods
44. Ghiara V. Disambiguating the role of paradigms in mixed methods research. J Mix Methods Res. 
2020;14(1):11–25. doi:10.1177/1558689818819928
45. de Morton NA. Th e PEDro scale is a valid measure of the methodological quality of clinical trials: a 
demographic study. Aust J Physiother. 2009;55:129–133. doi:10.1016/S0004-9514(09)70043-1
46. Law M, Stewart D, Pollock N, et al. Critical Review Form–Quantitative Studies. Hamilton, ON, Canada: 
McMaster University; 2007. https://www.unisa.edu.au/siteassets/episerver-6-fi les/global/health/sansom/
documents/icahe/cats/mcmasters_quantitative-review.pdf
47. Letts L, Wilkins S, Law M, et al. Critical Review Form—Qualitative Studies. Hamilton, Ont. Canada: 
McMaster 
University; 
2007. 
https://monash.rl.talis.com/items/766BE0A2-0957-B9B8-ACEC-
8CDE5564E516.html
48. Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA, et al. Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn’t. Br Med 
J. 1996;312:71–72. doi:10.1136/bmj.312.7023.71
49. Catalogue of Bias Collaboration, Spencer EA, Brassey J, Mahtani K. Recall bias. In: Catalogue of Bias. 
2017. https://www.catalogofb ias.org/biases/recall-bias
50. Satija A, Yu E, Willett WC, Hu FB. Understanding nutritional epidemiology and its role in policy. Adv 
Nutr. 2015;6(1):5–18. doi:10.3945/an.114.007492
51. Schnefk e CH, Kantukule CT, Muth MK, et al. Nutritional epidemiology. Curr Dev Nutr. 
2018;2(11):nzy045. doi:10.1093/cdn/nzy045
52. Sullivan A, Gilbert WS. Iolanthe, Or, Th e Peer and the Peri: A New and Original Comic Opera in Two 
Acts. New York, NY: J. M. Stoddart; 1882.


===PAGE 94===
4
BEHAVIORAL ASPECTS 
OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
KAREN CHAPMAN-NOVAKOFSKI AND KRISTEN N. DIFILIPPO
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Explain the role of behavior in public health nutrition using key constructs from eight 
behavior theories.
• Understand the role that behavioral economics plays in behavior change.
• Apply behavior theory to the development of public health nutrition interventions.
INTRODUCTION
Many forces work together to impact health outcomes for populations. As discussed in previ-
ous chapters, public health nutrition considers social determinants of health and biology. Social 
determinants of health is a topic area within Healthy People 2020 with the goal of establishing 
social and physical environments that support good health for everyone.1 Social determinants of 
health include factors related to the individual, such as literacy, language, and culture, as well as 
factors about resources and access to resources (Figure 4.1). Resources might include safe hous-
ing, food markets, healthcare services, transportation, and technology. Access to these resources 
and the quality of the resources are very important. Health equity is a core theme when discussing 
the social determinants of health, especially when considering the structural or policy-level issues 
of health. A social gradient is evident where one’s social position is linked to health, and one’s 
social position is infl uenced by economic, social, and political factors.2
Another component determining health is human behavior. Many behaviors impact health 
and nutrition outcomes, and many interventions focus on changing these behaviors. Public 
health nutrition initiatives target numerous behaviors such as increasing fruits and vegetables, 
selecting whole grains and low-fat dairy, increasing activity, and decreasing saturated fat and 
sodium. On the surface, it may appear that education on what behaviors are benefi cial would 
result in improved health; however, behavior change is a complex process. An individual may 
know exactly what behavior he or she needs to engage in, but still not be able to execute the 
change process. Behavior theories provide frameworks for understanding why and how people 
change, as well as what barriers prevent change. Th ese theories are useful for identifying targets 


===PAGE 95===
70 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
of education in public health nutrition interventions as well as for understanding why a program 
may have failed to change behavior.
Th eorizing how behavior changes requires understanding the numerous internal and external 
forces that contribute to human behavior. Personal characteristics such as genetics, preferences, 
and personality all play a role in the behaviors people engage in. However, these individual char-
acteristics are not the only predictor of behavior. Th e environment also directly and indirectly 
infl uences behavior. Environment can be broken down into many levels, such as the home envi-
ronment, the community, the social environment, and even policy and cultural factors. Diff erent 
theories focus on these varying levels of infl uence. Understanding each level of infl uence and how 
these levels interact is critical to creating eff ective interventions.
LEVELS OF BEHAVIOR THEORY
Individual
Individual qualities impact behavior patterns. Th e biological and psychological traits exhibited 
by a person play a role in the behaviors one will engage in or avoid. Multiple theories examine 
individual factors as primary constructs of behavior change. For example, the Health Belief 
Model (HBM) centers around an individual’s perceptions as primary predictors of behavior.3,4 
Th e Th eory of Planned Behavior (TPB) also focuses on individual attitudes and perception of 
control as primary to predicting intention to change.5 When using these constructs to predict 
behavior or target behavior change, the central focus is characteristics of the individual. External 
factors are also examined from the perspective of the infl uence on the individual. For example, 
in the HBM, cues to action may be external (information from media or healthcare providers) 
as well as internal (pain, symptoms). Socioeconomic status is considered as it impacts individual 
FIGURE 4.1 Framework for social determinants of change and health.
Source: From Solar O, Irwin A. A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. Social Deter-
minants of Health Discussion Paper 2 (Policy and Practice). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
SOCIOECONOMIC
AND POLITICAL
CONTEXT
Governance
Macroeconomic
policies
Socioeconomic
position
Education
Occupation
Income
Culture and
societal values
Social policies
labour market,
housing, land
Public policies
education, health,
social protection
Social class
gender
ethnicity (racism)
STRUCTURAL DETERMINANTS
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF
HEALTH INEQUITIES
Social cohesion 
and social capital
INTERMEDIARY DETERMINANTS
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS
OF HEALTH
Material circumstances
(Living and working
conditions, food
availability, etc.)
Behaviors and
biological factors
Psychosocial factors
Health system
IMPACT ON
EQUITY IN
HEALTH
AND
WELL-BEING


===PAGE 96===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
71
perceptions. In the TPB, subjective norm or perceived social pressures are also external factors 
that predict behavior change based on how the individual perceives them.
Social and Environmental
Behavior change can also be examined with social constructs as a primary focus. Social Cognitive 
Th eory (SCT) examines the social forces that impact learning and behavior.6,7 In this theory, indi-
vidual behaviors and personal factors are shown as reciprocal with both each other and the social 
environment. Social determinants of health, while not a specifi c theory, play a role in determining 
health outcomes. Th ese include the neighborhood and built environment, availability of healthcare, 
the community context, education, and economic stability (social determinants of health). While 
many theories focus on individual choices, the policy and cultural environment can have direct 
impacts on behavior and should be considered while targeting behavior change interventions.
Social-Ecological Models
Social-ecological models are useful tools for visualizing how the individual as well as the envi-
ronmental context determines behavior outcomes. Brofenbrenner’s ecological framework con-
siders the interrelatedness of individual, community, and population characteristics to behavior.8 
Social-ecological models are characterized by levels of infl uence starting with individual factors 
and then expanding to family context, community, and the larger cultural and political environ-
ment. For each level added, the models consider that all lower levels are impacted. For example, 
the community impacts both the family and the individual.
Many models have been created based on the target behavior being studied. One example 
is shown in the 2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans.9 Social-ecological models always 
position the individual at the center, with expanding layers of infl uence. In this example, social 
and cultural norms and values are shown as the outermost layer of infl uence impacting sectors, 
settings, and individuals. Social-ecological models are used to identify potential targets of inter-
ventions, especially when considering complex problems. Using the Food and Physical Activity 
Decisions Social-Ecological Model (health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/chapter-3/
social-ecological-model/#fi gure-3-1-a-social-ecological-model-for-food-and-physical-activ), an 
intervention targeting child eating patterns might focus on home, childcare, or school settings, 
or the policies impacting those settings. In the latter case, the purpose of changing policy would 
be to change the environment and as a result to change food-related behaviors of a population of 
individuals.
BEHAVIOR THEORIES AND APPLICATIONS
Behavioral theories can help us understand the reasons why an intervention or program works 
or not. Knowing why a program is successful or not can help to develop better, more tailored 
programs. However, it is sometimes not practical to measure all possible infl uencers of a par-
ticular behavior change. In addition, audiences change, and what has been infl uential with one 
group may not be true for another. Time, eff ort, and fi nancial considerations are important in 
program development and evaluation. Nevertheless, having a theoretical framework for program 
development and evaluation provides some structure and insight into a program’s outcome. Th ere 
are many behavioral theories and models. Th is chapter focuses on four: the HBM, the SCT, the 
Social-Ecological Model (SEM), and the Diff usion of Innovation.


===PAGE 97===
72 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Health Belief Model
Th e HBM is a health behavior change model developed by Irwin M. Rosenstock for studying 
and promoting the uptake of health services. Th e model was further developed by Becker and 
colleagues in the 1970s.3,4,10 Th e basic components of the HBM include perceived susceptibility, 
perceived severity, perceived benefi ts, and perceived barriers. Th e fi rst two consider an indi-
vidual’s perceptions regarding a health outcome. Th e latter two focus on perceptions regarding 
health behaviors. Cues to action are factors within the HBM that can cause a person to change. 
Th ese may be internal or external. Internal cues to action include noticing symptoms of a disease 
or condition. People may be motivated to change their physical activity habits if they realize they 
are having diffi  culty climbing the stairs or playing with their child. External cues to action are 
environmental, such as receiving a reminder card to schedule a checkup or a text reminder to log 
more steps. Self-effi  cacy has been added to the original model, and it is the belief that one can 
accomplish change (Table 4.1).
An example of the HBM in action is refl ected in this scenario:
Lucy’s mother has osteoporosis and so did her grandmother. Lucy fears she is also sus-
ceptible to this condition. Her grandmother had terrible pain and several fractures that 
compromised her quality of life. Her mother doesn’t mention pain, but has become shorter 
with some curvature of the spine. As a result, she doesn’t like the way some of her clothes fi t 
any longer. Lucy’s perceived severity of osteoporosis ranges from annoyance to quite severe. 
Lucy feels that improving her diet and physical activity habits would be a clear benefi t in 
reducing her risk of osteoporosis. She perceives the barriers to changing diet and physical 
activity habits to be mostly related to time for planning meals more carefully and managing 
more minutes per day being active. Lucy’s mother falls from a stepladder while reaching a 
top closet shelf. Th is cue to action motivates Lucy to make changes.
TABLE 4.1 HEALTH BELIEF MODEL: A BEHAVIOR CHANGE MODEL FOR STUDYING 
ACCEPTANCE AND APPLICATION OF HEALTH SERVICES
AN INDIVIDUAL’S EVALUATION OF:
EXAMPLE QUESTIONS
Perceived 
susceptibility
The risk of getting the condition
How likely do you think you are to 
develop this health issue?
Perceived 
severity
The seriousness of the condition and 
its potential consequences for them as 
individuals; consequences may be health 
related or social 
How serious are the consequences for 
you if you develop this condition?
Perceived 
benefi ts
Positive consequences of adopting a 
behavior related to the health condition
How powerful are the potential pos-
itive consequences of adopting this 
behavior?
Perceived 
barriers
Diffi culties in adopting a behavior related 
to the health condition
How powerful are the potential diffi cul-
ties related to adopting this behavior?
Cues to action
The impact of the stimulus to accept the 
recommended action
How powerful is the stimulus related 
to adopting this behavior?
Self-effi cacy
The person's confi dence on ability to 
successfully perform the behavior
How powerful is their confi dence to 
successfully adopt this behavior?


===PAGE 98===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
73
In a study of 232 Chinese adults with hypertension, the HBM was used to predict medication 
adherence. A questionnaire refl ecting the HBM factors in relation to antihypertension medica-
tion use was administered as well as a section related to self-effi  cacy for taking medication as pre-
scribed. Results indicated that those with higher levels of perceived susceptibility, cues to action, 
and self-effi  cacy and a lower level of perceived barriers were signifi cantly associated with better 
adherence to their antihypertensive medication prescription. Th e authors suggested that focusing 
counseling on these four factors could improve medication adherence in Chinese patients.11
Studies have shown that some factors are stronger than others in a given targeted behavior, 
depending on the behavior itself, the target audience, and context. In a cross-sectional study of 
college students (n = 476), the perceived benefi ts of eating a healthful diet and engaging in physi-
cal activity were the strongest predictors within the HBM for body mass index.12 In a study of 170 
women in Appalachia, perceived barriers predicted frequency of mammography, but other HBM 
variables did not fi t well in the statistical models.13
Although the HBM is fairly easy to understand and apply, it does not necessarily take into 
account habits, attitudes, or emotions such as fear or denial. However, expansion of the HBM 
can include threat, action, and outcomes assessment, as well as antecedents such as demograph-
ics and health history, social infl uences, emotional responses, and intentions.14 At times, the 
HBM has been “expanded” to include factors from other theories, such as stage of readiness and 
knowledge.15 Th e HBM can be used with programs promoting decreasing disease risk, but does 
not adapt easily to nondisease-related nutrition behaviors, such as general healthy nutrition and 
MyPlate adoption or school nutrition programs.
Social Cognitive Theory
Th e SCT was developed in the 1960s by Bandura, and it was referred to at that time as the Social 
Learning Th eory.6,7 Th e SCT has four concepts: competencies and skills; expectancies and beliefs; 
evaluative standards; and personal goals. Competencies involve both declarative and procedural 
knowledge. Declarative knowledge is facts, such as knowing which foods are high in sodium. 
Procedural knowledge is knowing how to do something, such as knowing how to eat during the 
day to keep sodium levels below 2,300 mg. Being able to act upon both declarative and procedural 
knowledge refl ects a person’s skill. Expectancies and beliefs frame what people think will happen 
if a situation occurs, such as a health issue. For instance, some people may believe that if they are 
diagnosed with cancer, they will die. Others may believe managing cancer will be a struggle, but 
do not believe death would be imminent.
Evaluative standards are one’s own moral or social standards that may change with diff erent 
situations or challenges. For instance, a person may feel that a plant-based diet is the “best” choice, 
but do not feel badly if they do not eat that pattern every day. Refl ection on one’s own behavior 
and evaluating this behavior leads to self-regulation and goal attainment. Personal goals help to 
establish behavioral priorities and contribute to self-regulation. In a systematic review of online 
dietary interventions, the most oft en used behavior change techniques were goal setting and 
self-monitoring, which have also been reported for face-to-face interventions focused on diet and 
physical activity.16,17
A key component in SCT is observational learning and modeling, recognizing that we can 
learn and adapt by modeling the behavior of others. Th us, skill can be developed through declar-
ative and procedural knowledge, as well as by observational learning. For instance, reading a 
recipe can supply both declarative (ingredients) and procedural knowledge (recipe directions), 
but watching a cooking demonstration can enhance that skill (observational learning). Figure 4.2 


===PAGE 99===
74 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
shows someone making latte art. A video showing latte art would be more informative, but the 
observational component of a skill is evident. Self-effi  cacy is embedded within these concepts. 
Both observational learning and practice can add to skill development and enhance one’s self-ef-
fi cacy. Factors that can aff ect observational learning include both the status of the model and how 
similar the model is to the learner. Th e model should have some status to infl uence the learner, 
but not so much that he or she cannot identify with the model. For instance, watching a chef 
demonstrate a recipe might intrigue or challenge the learner, but it may also provide little rein-
forcement to the learner that he or she can create the dish. However, having a nutrition educator 
demonstrate the recipe can provide both status and comparability.
Th e SCT includes a process called reciprocal determinism. Th is process recognizes that 
personal, behavioral, and environmental factors are intertwined and infl uence each other in a 
dynamic manner. For example, a person whose brother was killed in an alcohol-related accident 
(personal factor) may choose not to drink at a social event (behavioral factor). If the event includes 
nonalcoholic beverages, the environmental factors would support this behavior. However, if the 
event did not serve nonalcoholic beverages, and the person requests nonalcoholic beverages for 
the next year, the individual would be infl uencing the environment. Th e behavior of not drinking 
alcohol at a social event may infl uence others’ attitudes or behaviors. Th us, the personal, behav-
ioral, and environmental factors infl uence one another in a reciprocal manner.
Although the SCT is fl exible and broad, this may be a limitation as well as an advantage. Th e fl u-
idity of the interactions may make it diffi  cult to use eff ectively in a focused program. Although the 
SCT is oft en cited as the framework for nutrition and physical activity interventions, and many are 
successful, most do not directly test the eff ects of SCT aspects on the behavioral outcome in a statis-
tically meaningful way. For instance, a program to improve vegetable intake may be eff ective when 
measured by postprogram intake minus preprogram intake as compared to a control group; but the 
program leaders may not have reported whether measures of self-effi  cacy or goal setting statistically 
aff ected vegetable intake. Th is type of analysis is important but requires higher level statistics.
Theory of Planned Behavior
Th e Th eory of Reasoned Action (TRA) provided the framework for the TPB.5,18 Both focus on the 
intention to perform a behavior and the various factors that might infl uence one’s intention. Th e 
FIGURE 4.2 Demonstration of making latte art as an example of observational learning.
Source: Photo by Tyler Nix on Unsplash.


===PAGE 100===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
75
intention to complete a behavior is purported to be highly correlated with the actual behavior. 
Th ree basic mediators of intention within this theory are attitudes, subjective norms (those people 
who infl uence a person), and perceived behavioral control (whether behaviors can be under one’s 
own control).
Attitudes are favorable or unfavorable judgments about a given behavior and may be further 
divided into cognitive or evaluative factors and aff ective factors. Examples of cognitive or eval-
uative factors within attitudes are “eating fruit would be good/bad” or “eating fruit would be 
healthy/unhealthy.” An example of the aff ective factors within attitudes is “if I ate fruit, I would 
feel good/bad.”
Subjective norms relate to whether most people who are important to you approve or dis-
approve the behavior or are supportive or not of the behavior. Th ese may be diff erent people in 
diff erent situations. For instance, for a young adult, the subjective norms would include friends, 
coworkers, and perhaps supervisors or teachers for behaviors related to how they dress, whereas 
for behaviors related to what they eat, supervisors and teachers might not be important. Subjective 
norms include normative beliefs about what friends or infl uential people may think, as well as a 
motivation to comply with what those people may think.
Perceived behavioral control relates to the beliefs that one can control external factors as well 
as the person’s perceived power. Perceived power has been thought of as self-effi  cacy, or the belief 
that one can achieve the behavior. An example of control beliefs is “I (always . . . never) have 
access to vegetables I like to eat.” An example of perceived power is “I (am extremely certain . . . 
extremely uncertain that I) can eat two servings of vegetables each day.”
Th e TPB assumes a causal chain of factors leading to the intention to perform the behavior and 
then to the behavior itself. Th e TPB works best with concrete, singular behaviors that are under 
a person’s volitional control. For instance, drinking milk is a behavior that is concrete, singular, 
and under volitional control; whereas eating a healthy meal is ambiguous without specifi c criteria, 
could include multiple behaviors (drinking milk, eating vegetables, choosing lower fat foods), and 
would also be under volitional control.
Within a systematic review and meta-analysis of 42 journal articles, the TPB variable with the 
strongest association with intention to consume certain food choices was attitudes.19 However, the 
infl uence of TPB factors on intentions varied with whether the food choices were health promot-
ing or health compromising and whether the individuals were younger or older.
When using the TPB to direct a program or intervention, formative work to determine which 
factors are most related to the behavioral intention is needed since these infl uential factors may 
change with each audience and each behavior. Figure 4.3 illustrates the results of a study to evalu-
ate whether gender or ethnicity changed the infl uence of TPB factors related to fruit and vegetable 
intake according to the 5-A-Day promotion. Th e data supported the concept that neither gender 
nor ethnicity infl uenced the TPB factors, and so future programs would not need to consider 
these demographics specifi cally.20
Stages of Change
Th e Stages of Change (SOC) or Transtheoretical Model includes personal categorizations of 
where a person might be in the behavior change process (Table 4.2), as well as Processes of 
Change, Context of Change, and Markers of Change. Identifying where a person might be in 
the behavior change process provides clues as to what activities or programs would be helpful 
in moving the person toward behavior maintenance.21 In the precontemplation stage, raising 
awareness of the need for behavior change is appropriate. In the contemplation stage, assisting 


===PAGE 101===
76 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
with the decision-making process and discussing the advantages and disadvantages of making 
a change can help move to the preparation stage at which the person takes some small step or 
action. Providing options for taking this small step might facilitate action completion. In the 
action stage, acknowledgment and support for a person’s eff orts are important, as they are also 
in the maintenance stage. Behavior change is not always linear, and people may move back and 
forth or relapse.
FIGURE 4.3 Theory of Planned Behavior structural coeffi cients for the combined sample.
PBC, perceived behavioral control.
Note: *p < .05; R2 = variance explained.
Source: From Blanchard CM, Fisher J, Sparling PB, et al. Understanding adherence to 5 servings of fruits and veg-
etables per day: a theory of planned behavior perspective. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2009;41(1):3–10. doi:10.1016/j
.jneb.2007.12.006
R2 = .50
R2 = .11
Attitude
Affective
Instrumental
Affective
Subjective
Norm
PBC
Intention
5-A-Day
.22*
.16*
.59*
.04
.10
.03
TABLE 4.2 STAGES OF CHANGE CATEGORIES
DEFINITION, STATE IN WHICH. . .
EXAMPLE QUESTION
Precontemplation
Little or no consideration of change 
Do you know you should or how often 
do you use a separate cutting board 
for meats and for vegetables?
Didn’t know/Never do this
Contemplation
Some thought has been given to the 
change
Have heard of that/Don’t really do this
Preparation
Some task has been completed or 
some behavior related to the goal 
behavior change has occurred
Knew that/Bought another board
Action
A behavior plan is implemented to 
achieve the behavior goal
Knew that/Began using two boards
Maintenance
The behavior has been sustained for a 
given amount of time
Yes, knew/Always do this


===PAGE 102===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
77
An example of SOC is as follows:
Brenna is planning to start a running club for the Health Education Department at her 
university. She discusses the program with a group of her friends and fi nds that they have 
very diff erent responses to her goal. John quickly tells her that he doesn’t understand why 
anyone would want to run anywhere (precontemplation). James explains that he has oft en 
thought about running, but has no idea how to get started (contemplation). Hilary says she 
used to run in high school, but has not run in a long time. She asks how to sign up for the 
program and orders new running shorts and downloads a running app (formerly action/
maintenance, currently preparation). Rita explains that she just started running. Although 
it is hard to stay motivated, she has consistently been running 2 to 3 days a week for the 
last month (action). Brenna, who has been running consistently for years (maintenance), 
realizes she would need to use a diff erent strategy to motivate each of her friends.
Th e Processes of Change include both cognitive and behavioral aspects. Cognitive Processes 
of Change include activities that increase awareness either with facts or with emotional arousal. 
Marketing strategies oft en use these tactics. For example, in marketing a new phone, companies 
may provide information about the phone, but also show situations that are fun and inviting, hop-
ing that the potential buyer will associate fun with the phone and then buy the phone. Behavioral 
Processes of Change include using substitutions for a behavior and rewarding oneself for a small 
behavior change step. For instance, if the overall goal is weight loss, substituting thin-crust pizza 
for thick-crust pizza and then rewarding oneself with a movie would be substitution and self-re-
ward Behavioral Processes of Change.
Th e Context of Change refl ects the need to consider a more holistic approach to changing 
behavior. People’s life situation, beliefs and attitudes, and interpersonal relationships can all infl u-
ence whether a behavior change occurs and if it will be sustained. Personal characteristics might 
also be important to consider as well as the larger social and cultural context.
Using the SOC Model can be helpful in tailoring a program or initiative toward a particularly 
predominant stage. Many public health messages target the precontemplation stage by increasing 
awareness of a health issue and prioritizing the behavior. However, when used in a class or pro-
gram, some in the audience will not be at the stage the program is targeting and could be left  out. 
Th e SOC Model is also useful for one-on-one counseling.
Health Action Process Approach
Th e Health Action Process Approach is a framework that distinguishes between motivation 
factors that infl uence the intention to change a behavior and postintentional volition factors 
that infl uence the actual behavior change.22 Motivation factors that can result in an intention 
to change include perceived risk, perceived task self-effi  cacy, and positive outcome expectan-
cies. Postintentional volition factors include planning, action control, social support, and per-
ceived task maintenance self-effi  cacy. Planning includes the where, what, and how of an action 
or behavior, whereas action control includes self-regulation and awareness of internal standards 
or goals. Th e approach also includes staging of the individual in that he or she is either in the 
preintention stage, the intention stage, or the action stage.23
One program designed to address all three stages of the Health Action Process Approach to 
improve health outcomes for those with type 2 diabetes reported the approach to be useful in pre-
dicting outcomes, but the program was not successful in changing those outcomes. Th e research-
ers noted that the intensity or duration of the program may need to be increased. A limitation was 


===PAGE 103===
78 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
having individuals at three stages and the program for all three stages may not match the program 
and the individuals appropriately.24
Social-Ecological Model
Th e HBM primarily focuses on the individual. Th e SCT includes the individual as well as the 
infl uence of other people and environmental factors. Th e SEM has a broader view of behavior 
change.25 Whereas the SEM includes the individual, it also refl ects interpersonal factors; institu-
tional, organizational, or community infl uences; and policy and systems approaches to behav-
ior change. Th e individual is focused on to change an individual’s behavior through attitudes, 
knowledge, and skills. Interpersonally focused programs may also target those educators who in 
turn attempt to modify the individual’s behavior. Interpersonal factors may also include programs 
focusing on peers or the family. Modifying the workplace cafeteria off erings, the facilities off ered 
for breastfeeding mothers, and development of home-delivered meal services are all examples of 
a focus on the institution, organization, or community. Modifying the school snack policies, the 
taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages, and laws requiring measuring students’ body mass indices 
with reports to parents are examples of policy or systems change.
A cross-sectional study of women examined whether women engaged in self-directed learn-
ing to understand menopause.26 Because this issue is complex, the SEM was used to interpret 
fi ndings. Figure 4.4 illustrates how the SEM can be used to better examine complex issues. For 
instance, at the intrapersonal level, embarrassment or reliance on healthcare providers was 
identifi ed. At the interpersonal level, mothers and friends were helpful in fi nding information 
about menopause. At the institutional level, healthcare providers were not helpful in supporting 
women. At the community level, frustration at hormonal therapy being an “answer” to meno-
pause and common references to hot fl ash jokes were issues with a broader landscape. Although 
women had the least to say about issues within the policy level, some identifi ed the need for 
additional research funding and including menopause information in health education. Th e 
study concluded that these results highlighted the need for the normalization of menopause 
within our culture and identifi ed issues throughout the SEM that might be addressed to achieve 
this goal.
Policy, Systems, and Environmental Change
A model related to the SEM is the Policy, Systems, and Environmental (PSE) Change Approach. 
As in the SEM, policy changes include those at the organization, institution, or community level 
as well as national legislation policy. Systems change supports policy change. Systems change 
refers to a change in rules or procedures. Environmental change may encompass physical, social, 
and economic environments. For example, within a school district, changing the rules about hav-
ing recess before or aft er lunch may support a policy change in both school meals and physical 
activity. Adding more lunchroom space and additional physical activity equipment would repre-
sent an environmental change. Th e overall goal is a healthier diet and appropriate physical activity 
for students.
Most communities or programs adopting a PSE approach focus primarily on the policy and 
environmental aspects. Unfortunately, the PSE terms are not rigorously defi ned, so there may be 
overlap among policy, environment, and systems. In addition, many PSE approaches have not 
documented the impact on the individual’s behavior or health. Nevertheless, many federal agen-
cies and nonprofi t organizations believe that focusing more broadly on population health is an 
important public health strategy.


===PAGE 104===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
79
Diffusion of Innovation Theory
Th e Diff usion of Innovation Th eory (DIT) provides a perspective on which new ideas are adopted 
by people, who primarily adopts these new ideas, and how.27 As the public evaluates innovations, 
ideas, or even behaviors, they should seem new, easy, and compatible with the person’s beliefs 
or lifestyles in order to be adopted. Th ey should be able to be tried on a limited basis and have 
observable results. Th e theory posits that there are fi ve categories of people in regard to adopting a 
new idea: innovators, early adopters, early majority adopters, late majority adopters, and laggards. 
People can be infl uenced by their peers, important others, and marketing.
Th e DIT can be applied to both food producers and food consumers, and they may infl uence 
each other. For instance, developing and marketing organic food products must fi rst be adopted 
by food producers before consumers can buy and consume them. If food producers see this as 
new, fi tting within their product development plan with some ease, and having a tangible result 
in sales, then innovators and early adopters may be followed by additional companies. Consumer 
innovators may be the fi rst to purchase, wanting something new that fi ts with their beliefs. Social 
pressure may promote the sales to early and late adopters. Th is growth in sales may increase the 
number of organic products on the market as well as the number of companies producing organ-
ically labeled food.
FIGURE 4.4 The socio-ecological factors infl uencing the SDL actions of women. This fi gure 
illustrates the levels of environmental determinants of behavior that infl uenced women’s 
ability to be self-directed in their search for information about menopause.
HCP, healthcare personnel; SDL, self-directed learning.
Source: From Cooper J. Examining factors that influence a woman’s search for information about menopause using 
the socio-ecological model of health promotion. Maturitas. 2018;16:73–78.
Intrapersonal
Interpersonal
Institutional
Community
Public Policy
Inclusion in adolescent
health classes
Research funding
Embarrassment
Lack of interest
Overreliance on HCP
Perceived norms
Community attitudes
creating fear/taboo
Medicalization of
menopause
Insufficient research
Access to information
Cultural norms/media
Mother’s availability
Mother’s hysterectomy
Support (Lack of support)
•  Friends
•  Family
•  Social network
(community of women)
Lack of HCP knowledge/
involvement
Health care system
Health insurance


===PAGE 105===
80 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS
Behavioral economics is a term that refl ects reasons that a person might buy something. 
Behavioral economics oft en focuses on environmental issues. In the case of food purchases, avail-
ability and cost are key components. In terms of availability, interventions might provide salad 
bars at schools, farmer’s markets in neighborhoods, or remove sugar-sweetened  beverages from 
school vending machines. In terms of cost, interventions might off er coupons for healthier foods, 
points within an insurance plan, or a tax on alcohol or sugar-sweetened beverages.
In the area of increasing healthier food intake, strategies that appear most promising are using 
incentives paired with healthy options; changing the default option to the healthier choice (choice 
architecture or nudges); and decreasing energy-dense food intake. An example of using incentives 
paired with healthy food options is the Double Up Food Bucks Program (DUFB), which provides 
a dollar-for-dollar match of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) dollars in about 
24 states (www.doubleupfoodbucks.org/national-network). In Utah farmers’ markets, DUFB par-
ticipants increased their fruit and vegetable intake signifi cantly with this program.28 In a super-
market setting in Michigan, DUFB participants increased their vegetable expenditures, but the 
authors believed the impact was not persistent and not as large as other incentive programs.29
Choice architecture has also been described as nudges or environmental changes that modify 
behavioral choice by nudging the individual in the desired direction. For instance, vegetables 
and fruits are placed in a cafeteria serving line or the default meal option includes fruit instead 
of chips and fat-free milk instead of sugar-sweetened beverage. However, studies have not con-
sistently shown the eff ectiveness of these techniques, and more research is needed to determine 
which nudges produce the desired eff ects and in what settings.30 Strategies to decrease ener-
gy-dense food intake include smaller portions of the energy-dense food or replacement of the 
energy-dense food with a lower energy food.
In the area of increasing physical activity, strategies that include decreasing sedentary time by 
altering the physical environment or social environment through peer support might be eff ective. 
Signage to suggest taking the stairs instead of the elevator or wearable devices to alert individuals 
that it is time to move rather than sit are both examples of strategies to decrease sedentary behav-
ior. Both online and in-person peer support of increased activity have been eff ective.
Within a community or organization, framing may prove useful. For example, the label on 
a food may infl uence choice as in regular, large, supersize, or value size. Labels or indicators 
of healthfulness (green, yellow, red) might also infl uence choice. Posting of caloric information 
within vending machines and on restaurant menus is another behavioral economic strategy.
When using behavioral economics in counseling, behavioral contracts or pledges are some-
times employed. Th is strategy has been used with smoking, alcohol use, food intake, and physical 
activity. Incentives can provide feedback to reinforce the desired behavior.
ISSUES IN BEHAVIORAL THEORY APPLICATIONS AND TESTING 
IN RURAL, URBAN, AND GLOBAL COMMUNITIES
Applying behavior theories in diverse settings requires additional considerations for the theories 
to be used eff ectively and for the programs or interventions to be eff ective. Knowing your audi-
ence is important in program planning or behavior theory selection, but this can be complex. For 
instance, although most of the United States can be considered rural, most U.S. citizens live in 
urban settings. Indeed, “rural” and “urban” are terms that have diff erent defi nitions, depending 


===PAGE 106===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
81
on the reason for using these terms. For instance, counties may be defi ned as urban or rural, or 
areas/territories of land. Counties may have both urban and rural areas, whereas territories cross 
counties. County, state, and national policy-makers may look at all of these statistics. Metro–non-
metropolitan (metro) is a term that also may be used to evaluate economic and environmental 
trends. Metro areas have 50,000 or more people and may include adjacent counties if 25% or more 
of the workforce commutes to the metro county. Land use, economics, and administrative units 
might diff er depending on whether a county or area is isolated, or connected to a metro area. In 
any case, areas with fewer than 2,500 people are generally considered rural and nonmetro.31
Behavior theory application may be diff erent for rural versus urban areas, especially if the 
behavior theory includes environmental aspects. For instance, access to food, food security, 
access to healthcare, Internet access, physical activity opportunities and infl uencers, and health 
beliefs may diff er. However, rural diff erences in using health technology, as well as the availability 
and accessibility of Internet infrastructure, appear to be modifi ed by educational and economic 
diff erences between rural and urban groups.32
Access to food and food deserts have been studied in both rural and urban settings. Food 
deserts also have many defi nitions. Th e term may relate to how many stores, how many employees 
in stores, how far away stores are from home or work, the economics of the area, or the quality of 
food available.33 Transportation diff ers in rural versus urban markets, and may also present chal-
lenges to food access. People may travel farther to fi nd better quality food, obtain lower prices, 
or use federal food assistance benefi ts. Indeed, people may not shop at the stores closest to their 
home for a variety of reasons.
Access to healthcare in rural areas continues to be a primary issue,34 oft en because of fewer 
providers in rural areas. However, those in rural areas are more likely to engage in risky health 
behaviors, be uninsured, have chronic conditions, and be less likely to receive screening and diag-
nostic tests. While telemedicine may reduce the burden of fewer providers, challenges include 
bringing technology to rural areas, technology acceptance by rural residents, and insurance/
Medicare reimbursement for such services.
In addition, the people and their beliefs may diff er between rural and urban settings. For the 
rural individual, good health has been defi ned as being able to work, have social relationships, 
and remain independent. Rural residents may see death as natural whereas urban residents resist 
the idea of death.35 Th ese types of beliefs can have a profound impact on willingness to change 
health-related behaviors. Rural and urban issues are discussed more thoroughly in Chapter 6, 
Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition, and Chapter 7, Promoting Nutritional Health, 
Healthy Food Systems, and Well-Being of the Community.
Th ese concepts are more pronounced when working in global communities (discussed more 
thoroughly in Chapter 9, Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in 
Urban Settings). Culture impacts people’s perceptions, outcome expectations, beliefs, and behav-
ior. When culture is ignored, the public health initiative will not be eff ective. Getting to know a 
multicultural or global audience takes time, an openness to others, and careful attention to the 
dynamics of diversity. Knowing yourself and your own potential biases is also important. Being 
blind to diff erences among people is not being culturally competent. Understanding, embracing, 
and modifying programs and policies to suit diff erent cultures refl ect the cultural competency 
concepts (discussed more thoroughly in Chapter 5, Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public 
Health Nutrition).
Attention to diff erences in people and place is inherent in certain behavior theories. Social 
Marketing Th eory includes Exchange Th eory, whereby consumers or audiences must perceive 


===PAGE 107===
82 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
benefi t from participating; audience segmentation, in which similarities are identifi ed; the mar-
keting mix of price, product, place, and promotion; customer orientation; and monitoring of 
process and results.36 An example of Social Marketing Th eory can be found within the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention’s project VERB! It’s what you do!37 For audience segmenta-
tion, planners focused on four racial or ethnic groups (American Indian and Native Alaskan, 
African American, Hispanic, Asian American) within the 9- to 13-year age range, with addi-
tional targets on tweens who did not engage in much physical activity. Planners spent a year 
branding the campaign for the marketing mix and developed tangible goods to enhance the 
perceived benefi t. For the customers in this age range, being social, fun, and cool was part of the 
customer orientation. Monitoring of the processes and results culminated in over 30 published 
articles.38
All of these considerations create a challenge for the practitioner or researcher when adapting 
programs or interventions from one type of community to another. Formative research rep-
resents the time and eff ort taken to really know your target audience and their environmental, 
personal, or behavioral perspectives. Th is might be the time to pilot-test a program or gather 
information about the needs or beliefs of your community. Generalizations gathered from the 
literature can help mold the program, but spending time with the community is necessary for a 
well-developed project. Issues in program planning are discussed more thoroughly in Chapter 11, 
Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition.
CONCLUSION
Th e complex process of behavior change involves numerous internal and external factors. 
Th ese include the characteristics of the individual as well as the environments, systems, and 
policy infl uencing that individual. Understanding the process of behavior change is crucial for 
public health nutrition professionals who are working to infl uence nutrition behaviors. Th e 
theories discussed in this chapter provide frameworks for describing human behavior. Each 
theory provides a diff erent approach for understanding and modifying behavior. Th e theory 
that is best for a project depends on the factors that are infl uencing the behavior that needs to 
be changed.
Behavior theories are useful for program design and evaluation in public health nutrition. 
During program design, theories provide context for identifying strategies to infl uence behavior 
change. In evaluating programs, theories provide structure for explaining some of the complex 
reasons projects experience success or failure. Th e proper use of behavior theories by public health 
nutrition professionals provides a valuable structure for addressing the complexity of nutrition 
behavior change.
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Behavior change is complex in terms of factors infl uencing behavior change both inter-
nally and externally and in terms of the process of behavior change.
2. 
Understanding these factors is important so that programs can provide a robust 
approach to infl uencing behavior.
3. Beyond the individual, systems, policy, and the environment may need to change to 
support individual behavior change.


===PAGE 108===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
83
CASE STUDY 1: IMPROVING CLIENT CARE PLANS 
AND STAFF MORALE AT A COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTER
Staff  at a community health center have noticed that many of their clients say that they do not 
have the time or money to improve their family’s meals. At a staff  meeting of the physicians, 
nurses, pharmacist, social worker, and nutritionist, they admit that they are bored and frustrated 
with making suggestions that are quickly rejected by the client. Many end up handing the client a 
sheet of money-saving tips and noting in the care plan that this was the action step.
Both for the morale of the staff  and health of the clients, an administrator sets a 3-month chal-
lenge: form a work group of at least three staff , brainstorm a project, and try it for 3 months. Th e 
work group with the most positive refl ection on the project from their own perspective as well as 
the clients’ perspective will receive recognition at the center, free parking for 3 months, and a pass 
to the local gym or pool for the summer.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Describe a social marketing campaign that a work group might develop.
2. 
Describe a program based on the SCT that a work group might develop.
3. 
Th is case study can be visually described by the SEM. Draw a fi gure to represent the 
case scenario.
CASE STUDY 2: DEVELOPING HEALTH AND WELLNESS 
PROGRAMS FOR A STUDENT HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Th e student health organization works on campus to promote a healthy environment, guide 
policy on student health priorities, deliver health and wellness activities and events, and off er 
health and wellness programs to student groups. Th e organization includes both undergraduates 
and graduate students, primarily from kinesiology, nutrition, community and public health, and 
healthcare management.
With diverse backgrounds and interests, it has been a challenge to narrow their focus for pro-
gram planning for the next academic year. Some were most concerned with overweight and obe-
sity issues and others with excessive alcohol intake. Sexual health was a priority, and bullying 
continued to be a problem. Aft er much discussion, the group decided a common element among 
all of these topics was stress. Th ey decided to plan the year’s activities and programs around man-
aging stress. Knowing that programs are most eff ective if framed within a theory, they decided to 
use parts of the HBM in their programming.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Th e fi rst semester will be focused on raising awareness of the impact that stress can 
have. Th e committee wants to target perceived severity of stress and perceived sus-
ceptibility of stress. Although posters and fl yers could be used, they want to be more 
engaged with the students. In a small group or individually, brainstorm ideas that 
engage the students and convey the message.
2. 
Th e second semester will be focused on management, especially the perceived benefi ts 
of managing stress and the perceived barriers to managing stress. What skills could be 
taught in a short workshop to address these two topics?


===PAGE 109===
84 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
3. 
Someone in the group feels that fl yers and posters could be eff ective cues to action. 
Create a fl yer or poster that could be an eff ective cue to action for managing stress.
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
Case: Mark and Gloria are both premed students in biology who have enrolled in a study abroad 
class during the summer. Th ey will be working and learning in the public clinics in the city of 
Gaborone in Botswana. Because English is spoken, they feel comfortable about being able to com-
municate on some level with the staff  and patients. However, they do not feel they know much 
about the health beliefs or practices of those they are going to be serving.
Complete the following:
1. 
Gloria feels that as long as they remember basic fi rst aid and follow the lead of the 
healthcare providers that they will be fi ne. She also thinks they might be able to teach 
the staff  and patients from her recent experience in a U.S. well-baby clinic. As a group, 
discuss the implications of Gloria’s beliefs.
2. 
Mark is enthusiastic as well, and he wants to develop a physical activity program that 
the elders at the clinic could participate in to help fl exibility, joint pain, and stiff ness. 
He has worked in an assisted care facility part-time, and got to know the physical ther-
apist quite well. As a group, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of Mark’s plan.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
Do you think you are susceptible to a chronic disease? Do you think your grandparents 
are susceptible? How do social determinants of health infl uence this perceived health 
susceptibility and health outcome?
2. 
A person can infl uence the environment, and the environment can infl uence a person’s 
behavior. Can you describe a situation in which both of these scenarios are true?
3. 
Self-effi  cacy can be important to behavior change. For instance, if you do not believe 
you can make a change, you are unlikely to be successful. Describe a time when you or 
someone you know improved their self-effi  cacy. Could this be replicated in a program?
4. 
Being aware of a health risk is necessary before behavior to decrease that risk can 
occur. Describe the stages of change in terms of fi rst becoming aware and then follow-
ing through the stages. Which stages might be most diffi  cult to move through?
5. 
Certain people adopt behaviors more readily, according to the DIT. Refl ect on someone 
you know who has this personality. Did they infl uence you to adopt the behavior? Why 
or why not?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Contento I. Nutrition Education: Linking Research, Th eory, and Practice. 3rd ed. Burlington, MA: Jones and 
Bartlett; 2016.
Coreil J, ed. Social and Behavioral Foundations in Public Health. Th ousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2009.
DiClemente RJ, Crosby RA, Kegler MC. Emerging Th eories in Health Promotion and Practice Research. 2nd 
ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2009.
DiClemente RJ, Salazar L, Crosby RA. Health Behavior Th eory for Public Health. Burlington, MA: Jones and 
Bartlett; 2013.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute. 
Th eory at a Glance: A Guide for Health Promotion. 2005. https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/research/
theories_project/theory.pdf.


===PAGE 110===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
85
GLOSSARY
Audience segmentation: Dividing people into subgroups based on similar characteristics, 
such as gender, age, or how oft en they use a product or service.
Behavioral economics: Th e study of why people buy products, especially related to cost and 
availability.
Belief: What a person thinks will happen as a result of a behavior; how a person feels the world 
works.
Competencies: Behavioral capabilities (skills) or cognitive capabilities (knowledge).
Cues to action: Internal or external factors that cause a person to change behavior or want to 
change behavior.
Customer orientation: Actions taken to align the product or service with what the target au-
dience perceives their wants or needs to be.
Declarative knowledge: Facts or information stored in memory.
Diff usion of Innovation: A theory that tries to explain how and why new ideas, use of new 
products or services, or changes in behavior spread.
Evaluative standards: Internal or external benchmarks against which behavior or outcomes 
are compared.
Exchange Th eory: How a person weighs the “pros” and “cons” or risks and rewards of a 
 behavior.
Expectancies: What a person thinks will occur as a result of a specifi c behavior.
Food deserts: An area where it is diffi  cult to buy food, sometimes related to buying high-qual-
ity food, sometimes to distance, and sometimes to cost.
Formative research: Information gathered to design an intervention or program that includes 
the needs and characteristics of the targeted population.
Health Action Process Approach: Framework of factors that relate to developing an intention 
to change and those factors infl uencing intention to develop into action.
Health Belief Model: A framework used to predict or modify health-related behavior focused 
on perceived barriers and benefi ts to change; perceived susceptibility for and severity of the 
condition; and cues to action and self-effi  cacy toward changing behavior.
Marketing mix: Factors that may promote a product or service, specifi cally product, price, 
promotion, and place.
Metro: Generally refers to an urban area.
Nonmetro: Generally refers to a rural or nonurban area.
Observational learning: Learning by watching others perform a behavior or skill.
Perceived barriers: W hat someone thinks the “cons” of changing a behavior may be.
Perceived benefi ts: What someone thinks the “pros” of changing a behavior may be.
Perceived severity: What someone thinks the potential impact a condition may have on him-
self or herself.
Perceived susceptibility: How likely someone believes they may develop a condition.


===PAGE 111===
86 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Policy, Systems, and Environmental (PSE) Change Approach: An ongoing, long-term plan 
to change behaviors by addressing factors external to the individual.
Procedural knowledge: Understanding how to do something.
Reciprocal determinism: A key tenant of the Social Cognitive Th eory in which personal fac-
tors, the environment, and personal behavior are infl uenced by and can infl uence each other.
Rural: Generally sparsely populated areas but can also include isolation from larger population 
areas.
Self-effi  cacy: Th e belief that one can achieve a set goal or behavior change.
Self-regulation: Internal refl ection on behavior that infl uences future behavior.
Skills: Capacity to perform certain functions.
Social Cognitive Th eory: A theory used to predict behavior or model interventions that will 
change behavior that includes reciprocal determinism concepts, observational learning, self- 
effi  cacy, and self-regulation.
Social-Ecological Model: A framework used to develop programs or interventions that  include 
a focus on the individual, intrapersonal behavior, organizational and community factors, and 
policy.
Social Marketing Th eory: Mass communication or advertising theory used to promote a 
product, service, or behavior.
Th eory of Planned Behavior: A theory that posits that subjective norms, attitudes, and behav-
ioral control explain the variance in intention to perform a behavior, which in turn is associated 
with performing that behavior.
Urban: Area of dense population.
REFERENCES
1. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020: Social Determinants of Health. 
https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-determinants-of-health
2. Lucyk K, McLaren L. Taking stock of the social determinants of health: a scoping review. PLoS One. 
2017;12(5):e0177306. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0177306
3. Rosenstock IM. Historical origins of the Health Belief Model. Health Educ Monogr. 1974;2(4):328–335. 
doi:10.1177/109019817400200403
4. Rosenstock IM. Th e Health Belief Model and preventive health behavior. Health Educ Monogr. 
1974;2(4):354–386. doi:10.1177/109019817400200405
5. Ajzen I. From intentions to actions: a theory of planned behavior. In: Kuhl J, Beckmann J, eds. Action 
Control: From Cognition to Behavior. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag; 1985.
6. Bandura A. Social Learning Th eory. Englewood Cliff s, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1977.
7. Bandura A. Social cognitive theory of self-regulation. Organ Behav Hum Decis Processes. 1991;50:248–
287. doi:10.1016/0749-5978(91)90022-L
8. Brofenbrenner U. Ecological models of human development. In: Postlethwaite TN, Husen T, eds. 
International Encyclopedia of Education. Vol. 3. 2nd ed. Oxford: Elsevier; 1994.
9. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2015–2020 Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans. 8th ed. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and 
U.S. Department of Agriculture; 2015. https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines
10. Becker MH, ed. Th e health belief model and personal health behavior. Health Educ Monogr. 1974;2:324-
473. doi:10.1177/109019817400200407


===PAGE 112===
 
4. Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition 
87
11. Yue Z, Li C, Weilin Q, Bin W. Application of the Health Belief Model to improve understanding of 
antihypertensive medication adherence among Chinese patients. Patient Educ Couns. 2015;98:669–673. 
doi:10.1016/j.pec.2015.02.007
12. McArthur LH, Riggs A, Uribe F, Spaulding TJ. Health Belief Model off ers opportunities for designing 
weight management interventions for college students. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2018;50(5):485–493. 
doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2017.09.010
13. VanDyke SD, Shell MD. Health beliefs and breast cancer screening in rural Appalachia: an evaluation of 
the Health Belief Model. J Rural Health. 2017;33(4):350–360. doi:10.1111/jrh.12204
14. Burns AC. Th e Expanded Health Belief Model as a basis for enlightened preventive health care practice 
and research. J Health Care Mark. 1992;12(3):32–45.
15. Sohler NL, Jerant A, Franks P. Socio-psychological factors in the Expanded Health Belief Model 
and subsequent colorectal cancer screening. Patient Educ Couns. 2015;98(7):901–907. doi:10.1016/j
.pec.2015.03.023
16. Young C, Campolonghi S, Ponsonby S, et al. Supporting engagement, adherence, and behavior change 
in online dietary interventions. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2019;51:719–739. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2019.03.006
17. Greaves CJ, Sheppard KE, Abraham C, et al. Systematic review of reviews of intervention components 
associated with increased eff ectiveness in dietary and physical activity interventions. BMC Public 
Health. 2011;11:119. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-11-119
18. Fishbein M, Ajzen I. Attitudes toward objects as predictors of single and multiple behavioral criteria. 
Psychol Rev. 1974;81:59–74. doi:10.1037/h0035872
19. McDermott MS, Oliver M, Svenson A, et al. Th e theory of planned behavior and discrete food choices: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2015;12:162. doi:10.11/86/s12966.
-015-0324-z
20. Blanchard CM, Fisher J, Sparling PB, et al. Understanding adherence to 5 servings of fruits and vegetables 
per day: a theory of planned behavior perspective. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2009;41(1):3–10. doi:10.1016/j
.jneb.2007.12.006
21. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC. Stages and processes of self-change of smoking: toward an integrative 
model of change. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1983;51(3):390–395. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.51.3.390
22. Schwarzer R. Modeling health behavior change: how to predict and modify the adoption and 
maintenance of health behaviors. Appl Psychol. 2008;57:1–29. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2007.00325.x
23. Schwarzer R, Lippke S, Luszczynska A. Mechanisms of health behavior change in persons with chronic 
illness or disability: the Health Action Process Approach (HAPA). Rehabil Psychol. 2011;56(3):161–170. 
doi:10.1037/a0024509
24. MacPhail M, Mullan B, Sharpe L, et al. Using the health action process approach to predict and improve 
health outcomes in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2014;7:469–
479. doi:10.2147/DMSO.S68428
25. Sallis JF, Owen N, Fisher EB. Ecological models of health behavior. In: Glanz K, Rimer B, Viswanath K, 
eds. Health Behavior and Health Education: Th eory, Research, and Practice. 4th ed. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass, 2008:464–485.
26. Cooper J. Examining factors that infl uence a woman’s search for information about menopause 
using the socio-ecological model of health promotion. Maturitas. 2018;16:73–78. doi:10.1016/j
.maturitas.2018.07.013
27. Rogers E. Diff usion of Innovations. 5th ed. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster; 2003.
28. Durward CM, Savoie-Roskos M, Atoloye A, et al. Double Up Food Bucks participation is associated 
with increased fruit and vegetable consumption and food security among low-income adults. J Nutr 
Educ Behav. 2018;51(3):342–347. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2018.08.011
29. Steele-Adjognon M, Weatherspoon D. Double Up Food Bucks program eff ects on SNAP recipients’ fruit 
and vegetable purchases. BMC Public Health. 2017;17:946. doi:10.1186/s12889-017-4942-z
30. Szaszi B, Palinkas A, Palfi  B, et al. A systematic scoping review of the choice architecture movement: 
toward understanding when and why nudges work. J Behav Decis Making. 2018;31:355–366. doi:10.1002/
bdm.2035
31. Economic Research Service. Rural Economy Populations, Rural Classifi cations. https://www.ers
.usda.gov/topics/rural-economy-population/rural-classifi cations/what-is-rural. Updated October 23, 
2019.


===PAGE 113===
88 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
32. Haggstrom DA, Lee JL, Dickinson SL, et al. Rural and urban diff erences in the adoption of the 
new health information and medical technologies. J Rural Health. 2019;35:144–154. doi:10.1111/
jrh.12358
33. Walker RE, Keane CR, Burke JG. Disparities and access to healthy food in the United States: a review of 
food deserts literature. Health Place. 2010;16:876–884. doi:10.1016/j.healthplace.2010.04.013
34. Bolin JN, Bellamy GR, Ferdinand AO, et al. Rural Healthy People 2020: new decade, same challenges. J 
Rural Health. 2015;31:326–333. doi:10.1111/jrh.12116
35. Gessert C, Waring S, Bailey-Davis L, et al. Rural defi nition of health: a systematic literature review. BMC 
Public Health. 2015;15:378. doi:10.1186/s12889-015-1658-9
36. Grier S, Bryant CA. Social marketing in public health. Annu Rev Public Health. 2005;26:319–339. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.26.021304.144610
37. Wong F, Huhman M, Heitzler C, et al. VERB—a social marketing campaign to increase physical activity 
among youth. Prev Chronic Dis. 2004;1(3):A10.
38. Huhman M, Kelly RP, Edgar T. Social marketing as a framework for youth physical activity initiatives: 
1 10-year retrospective of the legacy of CDC’s VERB campaign. Curr Obes Rep. 2017;6:101–107. 
doi:10.1007/s13679-017-0252-0


===PAGE 114===
5
PUBLIC HEALTH AND FOOD 
POLICY: ROLE IN PUBLIC 
HEALTH NUTRITION
LINDSEY HAYNES-MASLOW AND STEPHANIE BELL JILCOTT PITTS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Examine U.S. and global public health nutrition and agriculture policy.
2. Describe the purpose and functions of the major federal food and nutrition assistance 
programs.
3. Understand the policy development process in the United States.
4. Explain how public health nutrition policy can infl uence the community and consumer 
food environments.
5. Describe the links among the food environment, food security, and health disparities.
INTRODUCTION
Prior to delving into the complex nature of U.S. food policy and the intersection with U.S. public 
health policy, it is critical to review the basic principles of government in the United States, which 
many of us may have last discussed in a high school course. As you might recall, in the United 
States, we are a constitutional representative democracy that functions with a federalism form 
of governing. We have three levels of government, including the federal, state, and local levels. 
Each level of government is provided authority and guidance by the U.S. constitution. At both the 
federal and state levels, there are three coequal branches of government: legislative (elected con-
gressional representatives); executive (elected president/governor and agencies/appointed agency 
heads); and judicial (the appointed and elected judges). Th e branches are expected to provide a 
system of checks and balances over each other. Th e majority of public health authority, as dele-
gated by the 10th amendment to the U.S. constitution, lies at the state level. However, federalism 
promotes a sharing of power between the federal and state levels, and thus, much of the regulatory 
action and funding at the state level is directed by the federal government. At the end of the day, 
most public health activities, including nutrition services, are delivered at the local county/parish 
level, with funding support from both the federal and state levels. In the following sections, we 
further describe the federal departments and agencies involved in the U.S. food system, along 
with a summary of the major federal food and nutrition programs.


===PAGE 115===
90 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES INVOLVED 
IN U.S. AGRICULTURE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY
Th e federal government is organized into departments, independent establishments, and com-
missions and corporations. Federal departments can consist of federal agencies.1 Th e U.S. agricul-
tural system involves more than 10 federal departments and organizations. Because food touches 
many areas of the government, diff erent aspects of the food system are overseen by diff erent 
agencies. A brief overview of the federal agencies and organizations that include food provisions 
is listed in the following:
1. 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)2
 
■
Th e USDA is the main federal agency overseeing U.S. food and agricultural policy. 
It consists of 29 agencies and numerous departments and programs that oversee 
marketability, sustainability, quality, and safety of agricultural commodities. Th e 
organizational structure of the department includes several agencies that off er a 
variety of programs, many of which are provided as a service to agricultural indus-
tries. Th e USDA is explained in detail later in this chapter.
2. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services3
 
■
Th e Food and Drug Administration (FDA)4 is the primary regulatory agency impact-
ing the food industry with regard to food safety, food adulteration, and food labeling 
or misbranding. It protects consumers against impure, unsafe, and fraudulently 
labeled products. Th e FDA is also responsible for the safety of drugs, medical devices, 
biologicals, animal feed and drugs, cosmetics, and radiation emitting devices.
 
■
Th e National Institutes of Health (NIH)5 is composed of several highly specialized 
research and education based bodies, termed institutes and centers.
 
■
Th e Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)6 leads federal eff orts to 
gather data on foodborne illnesses, investigate foodborne illnesses and outbreaks, 
and monitor the eff ectiveness of prevention and control eff orts in reducing food-
borne illnesses. Th e CDC also plays a key role in building state and local health 
department epidemiology, laboratory, and environmental health capacity to sup-
port foodborne disease surveillance and outbreak response.
3. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)7
 
■
Th e EPA is housed under the Department of the Interior. It is primarily involved 
with protecting human health and safeguarding the natural environment. Th e EPA 
is responsible for regulating the use of pesticides in food. Th e EPA, in coopera-
tion with the states, carefully regulates pesticides to ensure that their use does not 
compromise food safety.
4. 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security8
 
■
Th e Department of Homeland Security works to ensure that our country is able 
to respond quickly and eff ectively to an attack on the food supply, major disease 
outbreak, or other disasters aff ecting the national food infrastructure.
5. 
U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC)9
 
■
Th e primary role of the DOC is to regulate industrial commerce and to prevent 
illegal stock market profi teering practices. Th e DOC agencies that most impact the 
food industry (directly or indirectly) include the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST),10 which works cooperatively with federal agencies and 


===PAGE 116===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
91
departments (e.g., FDA, USDA) in regulating standards, weights, and measures 
as they pertain to food products; and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), which is primarily involved in conservation and man-
agement of marine and coastal resources.
6. U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ)11
 
■
Th e federal court system is involved in the prosecution of food manufacturers 
and/or individuals suspected of violating food safety regulations.
 
■
Under the DOJ, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF)12 
is responsible for regulating the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Th e ATF National Laboratory Center tests new food products. Additionally, they 
determine whether any products currently sold in the market pose a health risk to 
consumers.
7. Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
 
■
Th e FTC,13 while technically not a federal department, enforces a variety of laws 
that protect consumers from unfair, deceptive, or fraudulent practices. Th e agen-
cy’s food-related activities primarily involve preventing misleading advertising on 
food and dietary supplement packages.
8. U.S. Department of Labor (DOL)
 
■
Th e DOL14 is responsible for overseeing labor-related regulations. Additionally, 
food processing and handling facilities are covered by regulations regarding 
worker safety administered by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA).15 OSHA’s mission is to ensure the safety and health of America’s workers 
by setting and enforcing standards; providing training, outreach, and education; 
establishing partnerships; and encouraging continual improvement in workplace 
safety and health.
9. U.S. Department of Defense (DOD)
 
■
Th e DOD16 has a variety of functions and activities that impact the food industry. 
DOD works cooperatively with the FDA with regard to emergency food sup-
plies and conducts research activities on military food rations. Th e U.S. Army 
Veterinary Corps17 audits, inspects, and approves food and water supplies and 
manufacturing facilities for military bases and military personnel.
10. Department of the Treasury
 
■
Th e Department of the Treasury18 operates the U.S. Customs Service, which works 
with other federal agencies to ensure that importing or exporting foods is done in 
accordance with U.S. laws and regulations. For imported foods, the U.S. Customs 
Service regulations require that the country of origin be identifi ed.
11. Department of Transportation (DOT)
 
■
Th e DOT19 regulates food products being shipped across state lines. As needed, in 
the event of a natural or intentional food contamination, the DOT works with the 
FDA and other agencies in food recalls, seizures, and tracebacks to where the food 
originated.
Major Federal Food and Nutrition Programs
Th e U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service (USDA-FNS) has a goal to 
end hunger and obesity through the administration of a variety of federal nutrition assistance 


===PAGE 117===
92 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
programs.20 Th e USDA-FNS mission is to “increase food security and reduce hunger by providing 
children and low-income people access to food, a healthful diet and nutrition education in a way 
that supports American agriculture and inspires public confi dence.”20 In what follows, we provide 
a brief description of each program administered by the USDA-FNS. More information about the 
programs is available on the National Conference of State Legislatures website.21
Th e Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP, formerly the Food Stamp Program) 
is administered by the USDA-FNS, and provides funding through the use of electronic benefi t 
transfer cards to supplement low-income recipients’ ability to purchase foods. Th e benefi t amount 
varies by household size, income, and expenses. To be eligible, families must meet income require-
ments and have liquid assets less than $2,250 or less than $3,500 if elderly.
Th e National School Lunch Program (NSLP) provides federal assistance, in the form of cash 
and commodities, to schools that provide lunch to students. Th e National School Breakfast 
Program (SBP) provides federal cash assistance for schools that provide breakfast to students. 
Students are eligible to receive free school breakfasts and lunch if their family income is below 
130% of federal poverty guidelines, or if they receive Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
(TANF) or SNAP benefi ts or services, or if they are migrants, runaways, homeless, or are in foster 
care. Children are eligible to receive reduced-price school breakfasts and lunch if the household 
income is between 130% and 185% of federal poverty guidelines. Schools with 40% or more stu-
dents eligible for free meals may serve free meals to all students at the school.
Th e Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) 
provides supplemental, nutrient-rich foods; nutrition education and counseling; and breastfeed-
ing promotion and support to low-income women, infants, and children. WIC benefi ts can be 
used to purchase from a list of nutrient-rich foods. Individuals are eligible if they are pregnant, 
postpartum, or breastfeeding women, infants, and children up to age 5 with household income at 
or below 185% of the federal poverty level (FPL).
Th e WIC Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program (FMNP) provides grants to participating states 
to off er vouchers to WIC participants that may be used in farmers’ markets and other approved 
venues to purchase fresh produce. All WIC participants are eligible to participate.
Th e Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) provides cash subsidies to participating child-
care centers, family day-care homes, aft er-school programs, and nonresidential adult-care centers 
for the meals and snacks they serve. In childcare centers and nonresidential adult-care settings, per-
meal/snack subsidy payments are the same as those for school meals. In childcare centers, eligibility 
for free and reduced-price meals and snacks is the same as for school meals programs. Elderly or 
chronically disabled persons attending participating nonresidential adult-care centers are eligible for 
free or reduced meals based on income guidelines that are the same as for school meals programs.
Th e Summer Food Service Program (SFSP) provides federal cash assistance and some commod-
ity foods to local public and private nonprofi t institutions that run summer youth programs, camps, 
or other recreation sites that serve low-income children during summer break or lengthy school-
year breaks. Individuals are eligible if they are 18 years old or younger and live in a low-income area 
where at least 50% of the children are in households below 185% of federal poverty guidelines or 
who are enrolled in a program in which 50% of the children are from families with incomes below 
185% of federal poverty guidelines.
Th e Senior Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program (SFMNP) provides grants to participating 
states to off er vouchers to low-income seniors for use at farmers’ markets and other approved 
venues to purchase fresh produce. Individual eligibility is determined by states but all participants 
must be at least 60 years old, with a household income less than 185% of the FPL.


===PAGE 118===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
93
Th e Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program provides grants to schools to purchase fresh fruit and 
vegetable snacks to be provided during the school day. Th e program operates in select schools 
nationwide, with priority to schools with a high proportion of children who are eligible for free 
and reduced-price meals.
Th e Special Milk Program provides public or nonprofi t schools or childcare institutions that 
do not participate in other federal meal programs with a per half pint reimbursement for part of 
the cost of milk served to children. Any child at a participating school or childcare institution can 
participate.
Th e Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP) provides cash supports, food commod-
ities, and distribution costs to emergency feeding organizations such as food banks and soup 
kitchens. States establish income standards for individual eligibility.
Th e Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP) provides monthly food packages to 
low-income elderly persons over the age of 60 years who have access to a local CSFP project and 
have a household income below 130% of the FPL.
Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations (FDPIR) provides a food package of USDA 
commodities to low-income households on Indian reservations and to Native American families 
residing in Oklahoma or in designated areas near Oklahoma. In addition to geographic eligibility 
requirements, FDPIR has income requirements similar but not identical to those for SNAP. A 
household cannot participate in both SNAP and FDPIR.
Th e Older Americans Act (OAA) Nutrition Programs are not included. Th ese programs are 
part of the Administration on Aging within the Administration for Community Living, and pro-
vide funding for nutrition services for older people throughout the country. Th e OAA Nutrition 
Programs include the Congregate Nutrition Program and the Home-Delivered Nutrition 
Program. Th e goals of these programs center around making community-based nutrition services 
available to older, at-risk adults.22
POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND PROCESS 
ACROSS GOVERNMENTAL LEVELS
Th e farm bill is known as the primary agricultural and food law run by the federal government. 
Th is comprehensive bill is passed every 5 years by the U.S. Congress. Th is is referred to as the 
“reauthorization process” and deals with both agriculture and nutrition. Th e farm bill is overseen 
by the USDA. Every 5 years, when the farm bill is reauthorized, Congress proposes, debates, and 
votes on the farm bill in hopes that it will be signed into law by the president. Th e last farm bill, 
the Agricultural Act of 2014, was signed into law on February 7, 2014 and expired on September 
30, 2018.23
Topics in the farm bill include nutrition and food assistance programs, farm crop prices and 
income supports, agricultural conservation, farm credit, trade, research, rural development, bio-
energy, and foreign food aid. However, because it is reauthorized every 5 years, the farm bill 
provides an opportunity for policy-makers to adjust, remove, and address specifi c agricultural 
and food issues. Because the farm bill covers so many topics (from nutrition to farming to conser-
vation), in recent years, more parties have become involved in the debate, including national farm 
groups, commodity associations, state organizations, nutrition and public health offi  cials, and 
advocacy groups representing conservation, recreation, rural development, faith-based interests, 
local food systems, and certifi ed organic production.23


===PAGE 119===
94 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Th e farm bill was fi rst passed in 1933 as part of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s New 
Deal legislation. It was created in response to the economic downturn that arose from the Great 
Depression and environmental crises caused by the Dust Bowl, in which drought and unsus-
tainable farming practices led to soil turning to dust. Its goals were to (a) keep food prices fair 
for farmers and consumers, (b) create an adequate food supply so that Americans would not go 
hungry, and (c) protect and sustain the country’s natural resources.23
Since then, farm bills traditionally have focused on farm commodity crop program support 
for primarily corn, soybeans, wheat, cotton, rice, dairy, and sugar. Th ese support programs, 
oft en in the form of subsidies, evolved through the 1960s, when President Lyndon B. Johnson’s 
Great Society reforms drew attention to food assistance programs such as the SNAP, formerly 
known as food stamps. Th e 1973 farm bill was the fi rst “omnibus” farm bill; it included not only 
farm supports but also food stamp reauthorization to provide nutrition assistance for needy 
individuals. Subsequent farm bills expanded in scope, adding titles for formerly stand-alone 
laws such as trade, credit, and crop insurance. New conservation laws were added in the 1985 
Farm Bill, organic agriculture in the 1990 Farm Bill, research programs in the 1996 Farm Bill, 
bioenergy in the 2002 Farm Bill, and horticulture and local food systems in the 2008 Farm 
Bill.24
Th e farm bill is an extremely large and complex piece of legislation. It is divided into var-
ious sections called “titles.”23 Th e 2014 Farm Bill had 12 titles. A brief summary of what each 
title includes, according to the National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition, is listed in the 
following:
 
■
Title 1: Commodities. Th is title covers price and income supports for the farmers who 
raise “commodity crops,” which are widely grown and traded crops in the United States 
and abroad. Th ey include crops like corn, soybeans, wheat, and rice as well as dairy 
and sugar.
 
■
Title 2: Conservation. Th is title covers programs that help farmers implement 
resource conservation eff orts on their land as well as land retirement programs, 
and easement programs that protect agricultural land. Th e title also helps institu-
tions and community organizations provide farmers with conservation technical 
assistance.
 
■
Title 3: Trade. Th is title covers trade, including food exports to other countries and 
international food aid programs.
 
■
Title 4: Nutrition. Th is title covers nutrition and food assistance programs to help 
low-income Americans purchase food for their families and educate them about 
healthy eating. Th ese programs include SNAP (formerly known as “food stamps”), 
SNAP-Education, SNAP-Outreach, the Expanded Food and Nutrition Education 
Program (EFNEP), and the Food Insecurity Nutrition Incentive (FINI) Program.
 
■
Title 5: Credit. Th is title covers federal loan programs for farmers to help them get 
access to loans and fi nancial tools they need to purchase land and equipment and con-
tinue their farming operations.
 
■
Title 6: Rural Development. Th is title covers help to boost economic growth in rural 
communities through rural business and community development (including farm 
businesses), housing, and infrastructure improvement.
 
■
Title 7: Research, Extension, and Related Matters. Th is title supports agriculture and 
food research, education, and extension programs. Th is title helps train and educate 
the next generation of farmers.


===PAGE 120===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
95
 
■
Title 8: Forestry. Th is title supports conservation eff orts in forest-specifi c settings. It 
also provides incentives and programs that help farmers and rural communities pro-
tect forest resources.
 
■
Title 9: Energy. Th is title includes programs that encourage farmers to grow and pro-
cess crops for biofuel. It also helps farmers with installing renewable energy systems on 
their land and supports research related to energy.
 
■
Title 10: Specialty Crops & Horticulture. In the farm bill, the term “specialty crops” 
refers to fruits, vegetables, nuts, and nursery crops (such as fl owers, trees, and plants). 
Th is title supports farmers’ market and local food programs, as well as funding for 
research and infrastructure specifi c to those specialty crops. Last, it includes funding 
for organic research and organic certifi cation programs.
 
■
Title 11: Crop Insurance. Th is title provides payments in the form of “premium 
subsidies” to farmers as well as payments in the form of “subsidies” to crop insurance 
companies who sell federal crop insurance to farmers. It also gives the USDA’s Risk 
Management Agency the authority to research, develop, and change insurance policies.
 
■
Title 12: Miscellaneous. Th is title includes many topics, including outreach programs 
for beginning, socially disadvantaged, and veteran farmers and ranchers; agricultural 
labor safety and workforce development; and livestock health.
How the Farm Bill Becomes a Law
How does the farm bill become law? Th e fi rst step is to reauthorize the farm bill. Th is happens 
approximately every 5 years. It begins with farm bill hearings, also known as “listening sessions” 
where members of Congress take input from the public, industry, and advocates about what they 
want to see in a new bill. Th ese hearings take place in Washington, DC, and in cities across the 
country. Hearings can take up to several months.
Aft er the hearings, the House of Representatives (House) and Senate Agriculture Committees 
each write ca draft  of their own farm bill and debate, amend, and change it (this process is referred 
to as “marking up”). Th ese House and Senate agricultural committees can write farm bills that 
look very diff erent. Once each agricultural committee is ready for the House or Senate to vote 
on their bill, it will go up for a full “fl oor vote.” Th at means the entire House or Senate members 
debate the bill, make amendments, and vote on it.23
Aft er both the full House and Senate have passed their version of the farm bill—which can take 
months and may require the farm bill being sent back to the agricultural committee for more work—
the two separate House and Senate farm bills go to a smaller group of senators and House members 
called a “conference committee.” In the conference committee, these members will work to combine 
the two separate House and Senate farm bills into one farm bill. Th is process oft en requires a great 
deal of compromise between the House and Senate conference committee members.23
Once the conference committee agrees on a single farm bill, it goes back to the House and 
Senate fl oors for a vote. Once the House and Senate vote to approve the farm bill, they send it to 
the president. Th e president can sign it into law or can veto it (and send it back to Congress to 
make additional changes).23 Figure 5.1 details the process by which a bill becomes law.
Farm Bill Spending by Major Programs
Another component of passing the farm bill has to do with funding (also known as “appropria-
tions”). Th e cost of the farm bill has grown over time, though relative proportions across the major 
program groups have shift ed. Since the 1990s, conservation program spending has steadily risen 


===PAGE 121===
96 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
as conservation programs have expanded. Farm commodity program spending has both risen 
and fallen in response to market prices. Crop insurance program costs have increased steadily 
to cover more commodity crops and they have become a primary strategy for risk management. 
Nutrition assistance programs in the farm bill rose sharply aft er the economic recession in 2009, 
in which President Obama approved stimulus funding to increase aid to families suff ering in the 
economic downturn. However, funding for nutrition assistance programs has slightly declined 
since the economy has improved.24
Currently, nearly 80% of the farm bill’s funding goes to nutrition programs. Crop insurance 
programs are approximately 9%. Conservation and commodity crop programs are approximately 
5% to 6% of the farm bill funding, and all other programs account for approximately 1% of the 
farm bill’s budget.
Th e 5-year reauthorization of the farm bill was signed by President Trump on December 20, 2018. 
Th e $867 billion reauthorization will help support county economies and provide critical investments 
FIGURE 5.1 Bill history fl owchart: how a bill becomes law.
Floor consideration
Heard in committee
Bill introduced
Referred to
committee
Second body: Heard
in committee
Second body: Floor
consideration
Passed w/
amendments
Passed w/o
amendments
Reconciled between both
bodies
Referred to second
body
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
President Vote
Approve
Veto


===PAGE 122===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
97
to rural and underserved communities. Th e farm bill conference agreement protects the SNAP (for-
merly known as food stamps) by maintaining existing eligibility and work requirements for SNAP 
recipients. It contains reforms that encourage approaches to job training and other employment-re-
lated activities proven eff ective by the SNAP Employment and Training (SNAP E&T) pilot programs. 
Th e farm bill conference agreement would establish a new National Accuracy Clearinghouse to pre-
vent individuals from simultaneously receiving SNAP benefi ts in multiple states. Finally, it would 
eliminate an awards program that gave states up to $48 million a year in federal funding for high 
performances related to program access and payment accuracy. Th e projected savings from these 
changes will be reinvested into food banks and other nutrition assistance programs.
THE CHILD NUTRITION ACT
One other major piece of federal legislation that impacts nutrition among children is the Child 
Nutrition Act. It includes funding for programs that serve food to preschool, school-based, and 
out-of-school settings. Th e most prominent programs under the Child Nutrition Act are the 
NSLP, SBP, and WIC.25 In the following, we provide a brief overview of these programs:
 
■
NSLP26: NSLP was started in 1946 in response to military needs stemming from World 
War II, when the U.S. government found that 40% of young adults who were not 
qualifi ed for service were malnourished. Schools participating in NSLP make decisions 
about how to design meals and set prices. Schools receive cash subsidies and commod-
ity foods from the USDA. Th e USDA dictates operational rules and implementation 
process. To help provide food to low-income children, schools participating in the 
NSLP are required to off er free meals to children from families with incomes less than 
130% of the FPL and reduced-price meals to children less than 185% FPL.
 
■
SBP: First piloted in 196627 and later passed into law in 1975, the SBP provides cash 
assistance to schools and childcare institutions operating nonprofi t breakfast programs. 
Like the NSLP, schools receive cash subsidies and commodity foods from the USDA 
to operate the program. To help provide food to low-income children, children can be 
determined to be “categorically eligible”28 to receive free meals if they participate in 
SNAP, are enrolled in Head Start program, and live in households with families with 
incomes less than 130% of the FPL.
 
■
WIC: Established in 1974,29 the WIC provides federal funding to states for supple-
mental foods, healthcare referrals, and nutrition education for low-income pregnant, 
breastfeeding, and non-breastfeeding postpartum women, and to infants and children 
up to age 5 who are found to be at nutritional risk.
Like the farm bill, the Child Nutrition Act is reauthorized every 5 years. Each time it is reautho-
rized, it is given a new name. In 2010, the Child Nutrition Act was called the “Healthy Hunger-
Free Kids Act.” Th e Child Nutrition Act was supposed to be reauthorized by Congress in 2015, 
but the House and Senate failed to agree on a fi nal bill. Th erefore, this act has been operating in 
the interim under 2010 rules.
U.S. AGRICULTURAL TRADE
With the election of President Donald J. Trump in 2016, one core tenet of his presidential cam-
paign was to promote American goods and products, including food. To accomplish this, in 
2018 the White House administration imposed tariff s on multiple other country’s goods being 


===PAGE 123===
98 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
imported into the United States. Generally, tariff s are a tax or fee collected by a government on 
imported goods from another country.30 While tariff s can raise revenue for a country (i.e., tariff s 
can encourage consumers to buy domestic products), they also have the potential to harm domes-
tic business if other countries also decide to impose tariff s. In the spring of 2018, aft er a round of 
tariff s imposed on other countries, such as China and Canada, these countries also imposed their 
own tariff s on U.S. goods, including agricultural products such as soybeans, dairy, pork, beef, and 
many fruits, vegetables, and nuts. It is important to understand that promoting domestic products 
through tariff s has both advantages and disadvantages.
GLOBAL HEALTH AND AGRICULTURAL ORGANIZATIONS
In addition to other countries’ agricultural government agencies or programs, there are global 
health organizations that work to promote access to food for low-income and vulnerable pop-
ulations. Th e most prominent include the World Health Organization (WHO), World Food 
Programme (WFP), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. Th ese organizations work across various countries. In 
the following, a brief explanation of each is listed:
1. 
World Health Organization: WHO was established aft er World War II in 1948.31 
Currently WHO works across six regions and more than 150 countries. Th eir mission 
is to achieve better health for all individuals. One of their main issue areas is nutrition.32 
Th e organization focuses on malnutrition and food insecurity, breastfeeding child nutri-
tion, solving the obesity epidemic, dietary recommendations, the role that micronutri-
ents play in health, and the impact nutrition has on infectious and chronic disease.
2. 
World Food Programme: Th e WFP was created in 1961 in response to President 
Dwight Eisenhower’s request to create an experimental food aid program through the 
United Nations system.33 Th e WFP focuses on emergency food assistance, relief and 
rehabilitations, development aid, and special operations. A majority of their work is 
done in countries that are malnourished. Th ey work with approximately 80 countries 
assisting 80 million individuals each year.34
3. 
UNICEF: Created in 1964, the UNICEF works to promote children and adolescents’ 
health, defend their rights, and help them with upward mobility in society.35 Th e 
UNICEF works in 190 countries with multiple programs, one of them focused on nutri-
tion. Th e UNICEF focuses on breastfeeding, solving micronutrient defi ciencies, using 
nutrition to assist with chronic disease, addressing emergency food assistance situa-
tions, improving child and maternal nutrition, and preventing overweight and obesity.36
4. 
FAO of the United Nations: Th e FAO was started in 1945. Th e FAO is an agency within 
the United Nations that works to address international hunger and food insecurity. Th e 
organization works in over 130 countries to ensure that all individuals have access to 
high-quality food.37
UNDERSTANDING THE ROLE OF PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY 
IN INFLUENCING THE FOOD ENVIRONMENT
In the United States, it oft en costs more to eat healthy foods than to eat unhealthy foods,38,39 and 
neighborhood residents who have lower socioeconomic status oft en have less access to healthy 


===PAGE 124===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
99
foods.40 A variety of public health policies can infl uence the availability of healthy and less healthy 
foods and beverages in communities. For the purposes of this chapter, we compartmentalize 
the food environment into the community and consumer food environments.41 Th e community 
food environment includes the types of food venues in a community, and is usually measured 
using distance to or density of “healthy” (supermarkets and farmers’ markets) versus “unhealthy” 
(fast food and convenience stores) food venues.42 Th e consumer food environment includes the 
foods and beverages available, the price of available foods and beverages, and the quality of prod-
ucts available in food venues, and is measured using food observation/audit tools, such as the 
Nutrition Environment Measures Survey in Stores (NEMS-S),43 Farmers’ Market Audit Tool,44 
and the Bridging the Gap Food Store Observation Form.45
PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION POLICY AND THE COMMUNITY 
FOOD ENVIRONMENT
Th e community and consumer food environments are infl uenced by public health policy in that 
policy can infl uence what is available in each setting. Two policy options for increasing avail-
ability of healthy foods and beverages in the community food environment include encouraging 
grocery stores to locate into communities that lack access to healthy food, and restricting the 
number of fast-food or drive-through restaurants that can be located in communities through the 
use of zoning laws.
Encouraging Grocery Stores to Locate Into Communities That Lack Access 
to Healthy Food
Th e Healthy Food Financing Initiative (HFFI) is a federal policy initiative that was modeled aft er 
the 2004 Pennsylvania Fresh Food Financing Initiative.46 Th e HFFI is a $400 million initiative to 
entice food retailers (e.g., supermarkets) into food deserts to promote greater availability, pur-
chase, and consumption of healthy foods in U.S. food deserts.46 Th e goal was to eliminate urban 
and rural food deserts within 7 years.46 Th ere have been evaluation studies of some of these initia-
tives, demonstrating that neighborhood residents’ perceptions of availability of healthy foods in 
their neighborhoods may improve,47 but diet does not necessarily improve as a result of residents 
shopping in the new supermarkets.47–50
Restricting the Number of Fast-Food or Drive-Through Restaurants 
That Can Be Located in Communities Through the Use of Zoning Laws
Another example of the way that policy can infl uence the community food environment 
includes zoning to limit fast-food restaurants in a community. Zoning laws are defi ned as those 
that determine “what can and cannot be built on parcels of land” within communities’ dis-
tricts.51 Zoning laws have two main purposes in regulating “what” can be built: (a) the height 
and design of a building and (b) the use of the building (i.e., what activities are permissible).52 
Zoning laws to limit the presence of fast-food restaurants in their community fall under one 
of two themes: banning and restricting. Under the fi rst theme, local governments can ban fast-
food restaurants entirely; ban certain types of fast-food restaurants, such as chain or franchise 
restaurants (also known as a “formula” restaurant); or ban restaurants from locating in certain 
areas, such as neighborhoods or historic districts. Under the second theme, local governments 
can restrict fast-food restaurants based on the number of fast-food restaurants in a certain area 
(also known as quota); restrict the number of fast-food restaurants per unit space (also known 


===PAGE 125===
100 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
as density); or restrict fast-food restaurants from locating near places with specifi c uses, such 
as schools, parks, or hospitals.52 While zoning restrictions for fast-food and formula restau-
rants have occurred in several municipalities, the “Fast Food Ban” in Southern Los Angeles, 
California, is the fi rst that was presented as a health measure and for a large municipality.53 It 
was a zoning regulation that restricted opening or expanding a “stand-alone fast-food restau-
rant” in Baldwin Hills, Leimert Park, and portions of South Los Angeles and Southeast Los 
Angeles.54
Governments can use scientifi c studies, epidemiological reports, and public health data to 
support the argument that zoning laws are needed to protect and promote the public’s health and 
safety.55 However, although there is much data to support that obesity is correlated with fast-food 
consumption, fast-food restaurant density, and proximity to neighborhoods and schools, there is 
limited data to support a causal link between obesity and fast-food restaurants.56
PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION POLICY AND THE CONSUMER 
FOOD ENVIRONMENT
Th ere are several examples of ways that policy infl uences the consumer food environment, includ-
ing changes to federal food assistance programs, such as the WIC and SNAP, taxes on unhealthy 
foods and beverages, and menu labeling in restaurants.
WIC Food Package Policy Changes
Th e 2009 WIC food package policy included revisions to the food package to bring it more 
into alignment with the Dietary Guidelines for Americans, and also included minimum stock-
ing requirements for stores that accepted WIC benefi ts.54 Th e 2009 food package policy change 
resulted in healthier items within stores that accepted WIC benefi ts,57–59 better prices,60,61 and 
improved dietary behaviors among WIC participants.62,63
SNAP Retailer Rule
Another federal policy that may lead to an improved consumer food environment is the new 
SNAP retailer rule, which includes a requirement for all food retail stores that accept SNAP ben-
efi ts to include minimum depth of stock for healthier foods. Th e policy is closed for public com-
ments related to the defi nition of “variety” and small food retailers may face many barriers to 
meeting the minimum stocking requirements.64,65
Taxes and Tariffs on Unhealthy Foods and Beverages
Sugar-sweetened beverage taxes can infl uence the price and availability of sugary beverages, ulti-
mately decreasing consumption.66,67 A 2014 tax on sugar-sweetened beverages in Mexico was 
associated with a 9.7% reduction in consumption of these products in 2015, with steeper declines 
in lower income households.66,67 Additional taxes have been enacted in several U.S. municipali-
ties; however, there are limited evaluation studies on changes in consumption as a result of these 
taxes.68 At an international level, trade policy can infl uence the pricing and availability of various 
types of foods: For example the Pacifi c Islands, which experience high levels of obesity, have 
imposed tariff s on sugary beverages and other obesity-promoting foods and beverages, ultimately 
making them less available.69


===PAGE 126===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
101
Menu Labeling in Restaurants
Required by the Aff ordable Care Act, menu labeling in restaurants is another way in which policy 
can infl uence the consumer food environment. Restaurants with more than 20 stores under the 
same name must post calories on menu boards. One 2014 review article found that menu labeling 
with calories alone did not have the intended eff ect of decreasing calories selected or consumed.70 
Adding interpretive nutrition information on menus could help consumers in the selection and 
consumption of fewer calories, and females (versus males) tended to use the information to select 
and consume fewer calories.70
Policy Change and the School Food Environment
While not directly related to the community or consumer food environments, school food pol-
icies have a critical impact on the foods and beverages served in U.S. public schools. Th e 2010 
Healthy Hunger Free Kids Act tightened nutrition standards in schools, requiring schools to serve 
more fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and less sugar, salt, and fat.71 Th ese standards also rede-
fi ne portion sizes and apply calorie counts (by grade level) designed to maintain a healthy weight, 
and schools are provided an additional 6 cents per lunch for meeting these updated standards.71 
In general, policies to improve the school food environment have resulted in healthier dietary 
behaviors among students and, in some cases, improvements in students’ weight status.72–74
Food Environments, Food Security, Health Disparities, and Other Food 
Policy Drivers
Healthy food environments can be compartmentalized into healthy community and healthy 
consumer food environments. A healthy community food environment includes being closer to 
food outlets that off er several healthier foods and beverages, such as supermarkets and farmers’ 
markets, and a less healthy food environment is defi ned by living or working closer in proxim-
ity to food outlets with fewer healthy options, including fast food and convenience stores. Th e 
Retail Food Environment Index (RFEI)75 and modifi ed RFEI (mRFEI; CDC) take density of both 
healthier food outlets and unhealthy food outlets into consideration in one index. Th e RFEI is cal-
culated as the ratio of fast-food retailers and convenience stores to grocery stores and supermar-
kets. In a cross-sectional analysis, the RFEI in California was associated with diabetes and obesity, 
such that individuals living in a less healthy environment had a higher likelihood of having diabe-
tes and obesity.75 Th ere are several cross-sectional studies demonstrating that healthier elements 
of the food environment (e.g., supermarkets, farmers’ markets) are associated with lower body 
mass index (BMI) and more fruit and vegetable consumption.76–78 A healthy consumer food envi-
ronment includes stocking healthier foods at an aff ordable price, and marketing such foods in 
appealing ways for consumers.79,80 As mentioned previously, changes in the consumer food envi-
ronment in response to the revised WIC food package policy have resulted in improved dietary 
behaviors among WIC participants.62,63
Poor Food Environments and Health Disparities
A poor food environment can be conceptualized as a food swamp or food desert. Food swamps 
can be classifi ed in several ways. Cooksey-Stowers et al.81 used three measures to quantify food 
swamps: (a) RFEI; (b) Expanded RFEI, which included fast food, convenience stores, and super-
centers in the numerator and supermarkets/grocery stores, farmers’ markets, and specialty 
food stores in the denominator; and (c) fast food and convenience stores in the numerator 


===PAGE 127===
102 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
and supermarkets/grocery stores, farmers’ markets, specialty food stores, and supercenters in 
the denominator. All three food swamp measures were positively associated with county-level 
obesity rates, controlling for food deserts, fi tness/recreation centers, natural amenities, low-fat 
milk price to soda price ratio, county size in square miles, and sociodemographic indicators.81 
Food deserts are areas with limited access to aff ordable and nutritious food.82,83 Although the 
original 2010 report indicated that distance to healthy food retail venues, such as supermarkets, 
was critical, the report has since been updated,84 illustrating the importance of individual-level 
factors, such as transportation and cost of healthier foods, in determining food purchase and 
consumption.
Associations Among Food Deserts, Food Swamps, RFEI and mRFEI 
and Food Insecurity, and an Unhealthy Diet
Zenk et al. used a longitudinal design to examine whether the proximity of food outlets, by type, 
was associated with BMI changes between 2009 and 2014 among 1.7 million veterans in 382 
metropolitan areas, fi nding no evidence that either absolute or relative geographic accessibility 
of supermarkets, fast-food restaurants, or mass merchandisers was associated with changes in 
an individual’s BMI over time.85 Cooksey-Stowers et al.81 found that all three measures of food 
swamps were associated with county-level obesity rates. In a longitudinal study, Lamb et al. 
found that BMI changes among women were not associated with changes in access to fast-food 
restaurants.86 In a California-based study, participants lost 1 pound for each standard-deviation 
improvement in their food environment.87
Efforts to Improve the Community Food Environment
Eff orts to improve elements of the community food environment include establishing farmers’ 
markets in underserved areas,88 building new supermarkets in underserved areas,47,48,50 and zon-
ing to restrict fast-food restaurants,53 all with limited eff ectiveness. A recent study of food shop-
ping behaviors indicates that individuals with very low food security are more likely to shop at 
convenience/corner stores compared to those with greater food security.89 Findings such as these 
indicate that access to healthy and unhealthy foods is not the only factor that infl uences consum-
ers’ purchasing and dietary choices.
Efforts to Improve the Consumer Food Environment
Eff orts to improve the consumer food environment include healthy corner stores,79,90,91 point-of-
purchase labels in supermarkets to denote healthier foods,92 and cost off set community supported 
agriculture (CSA) programs.93 More evaluation studies are needed to determine the eff ectiveness 
of such eff orts.
Th ere are several “little p policies,” such as the Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative to support 
breastfeeding94 and Partnerships for Healthier American Healthy Hospital Initiative,95,96 which 
improve the food environment in worksite and other community settings. Jacobson et al. off er 
policy strategies to reduce diet-related disease in the United States: (a) tax sugary beverages, (b) 
reduce sodium levels in processed foods, (c) require eff ective front-of-package nutrition labels, 
(d) eliminate marketing of unhealthy food to children, (e) increase subsidies to low-income peo-
ple for the purchase of healthy foods, (f) improve restaurant meals, and (g) mount campaigns 
to promote healthier diets.67 It is noteworthy that all of these suggestions are consumer-level or 
supply-level, versus community-level.


===PAGE 128===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
103
Most of what we have discussed is related to U.S. food security and food environment. 
Internationally, eff orts are underway to improve the food environment in low- and middle-in-
come countries. A review of various interventions to improve food security and the household 
environment includes agricultural interventions (e.g., home gardening, animal husbandry), air 
quality interventions (e.g., improved cook stoves), water quality interventions (e.g., water fi lters), 
and nutritional interventions (e.g., nutrition education).97
Health Policy Advocacy and Infrastructure in Rural, Urban, 
and Global Communities
Th e role of funding and partnerships in advocacy success is invaluable: For example, states receiv-
ing funding from the CDC’s Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity program enacted more 
obesity-related state legislation than states without funding and those with high partnership 
involvement implemented more local policies compared to states with low partnership involve-
ment.98 Holding retreats to reach consensus on the most critical policy advocacy eff orts to focus 
eff orts is one way to ensure that funding is used effi  ciently and that partnerships are maximized 
to achieve common goals.99 Th e Healthy Food Environment Policy Index (Food-EPI) is one tool 
to assess the extent of implementation of recommended food environment policies by national 
governments compared to international best practice.100 Th e utility of the Food-EPI is the poten-
tial to increase accountability to implement widely recommended food environment policies and 
reduce the burden of diet-related diseases.100
INFLUENCING FOOD SYSTEMS AT THE COMMUNITY LEVEL
Community Food Assessments
Community food assessments can be used to inform healthy food policies in local communities. For 
example, examining zoning ordinances in a local municipality may reveal inequities in opportuni-
ties to establish healthier food venues such as farmers’ markets.101,102 If such inequities are revealed, 
community nutrition practitioners and advocates can lobby for more equitable zoning ordinances.
Food Policy Councils
Food policy councils are oft en coalitions of food system stakeholders interested in advocating and 
developing improvements in the food system.103 In a survey of food policy councils, a majority 
reported participating in the policy process through problem identifi cation (95%) and education 
(78%), though few mentioned evaluating their policy work.104
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we described the federal agencies responsible for food and nutrition policy in 
the United States, including the USDA, the FDA, and the Department of Health and Human 
Services. Actions of these agencies infl uence food and nutrition policy in the United States. We 
also provided an overview of various food and nutrition-related programs to assist families in 
need, including the SNAP and the WIC. We described the policy process as it relates to the farm 
bill and Child Nutrition Act, which both infl uence many of these agencies and programs. In addi-
tion, global agencies such as WHO, WFP, UNICEF, and the FAO of the United Nations work to 
promote access to food for low-income and vulnerable populations.


===PAGE 129===
104 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
Later in this chapter, we provided an overview of how the food environment is defi ned and 
measured at the community and consumer levels. We also described how policies at the federal, 
state, and local levels can infl uence the food environment, as well as individual-level nutrition- 
and obesity-related outcomes. Such policies can range from changes to the WIC food package and 
changes to the National Lunch Program, as well as “Fast Food Bans” and sugar-sweetened bever-
age taxes. We concluded the chapter with metrics related to assessing policies that aff ect food and 
nutrition-related policies globally.
As you can see, individual-level food consumption is infl uenced by a complex dynamic of 
global, federal, state, and local policies, which infl uence what is available in our food environment 
for consumption.
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Th ere are several food-policy-related organizations in the United States and globally.
2. Th e nutrition policy development process in the United States is built upon the U.S. 
farm bill and the Child Nutrition Act.
3. 
Public health nutrition policy can infl uence the community and consumer food envi-
ronments in several ways.
4. 
Th ere are associations among various aspects of the food environment, food security, 
and health disparities.
CASE STUDY 1: PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION EDUCATOR: 
INCREASING THE NUMBER OF LOCAL FARMERS’ MARKETS
You are a public health nutrition educator in a local health department who wants to increase the 
number of districts in the municipality that have zoning ordinances that allow farmers’ markets.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Where would you fi nd out how districts are currently zoned?
2. 
Describe a strategy for engaging the planning department to work together to change 
the zoning ordinance to allow more farmers’ markets.
CASE STUDY 2: NONPROFIT THINK TANK: EDUCATING 
FEDERAL POLICY-MAKERS ABOUT LOCAL FRUIT 
AND VEGETABLE PRODUCTION
You are working in Washington, DC, for a nonprofi t think tank, interested in educating federal 
policy makers about the positive health and economic benefi ts of local fruit and vegetable pro-
duction and consumption.
Case Study Questions
1. 
What types of information would you put on a 1-page policy brief about the topic?
2. 
How would you go about disseminating the policy brief?


===PAGE 130===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
105
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
Learning activity #1:
Write a 1-page letter to your legislator about a food-related policy issue.
Learning activity #2:
Create an infographic about a food-related policy issue. Please see this example: www
.ucsusa.org/food-agriculture/expand-healthy-food-access/infographic-lessons-lunchroom#
.W3BUqi2ZO1I.
Learning activity #3:
Start following a food policy Twitter handle.
Learning activity #4:
Pick a food-related policy issue and write a 1-page brief that you could share with a hypothetical 
political stakeholder. Address the following questions: (a) What is the current status of the issue? 
(b) What are you asking for? (c) Why are you asking for it? (d) Why should they care? and (e) 
What is the result if they end up choosing the option?
Learning activity #5:
Policy playing fi eld exercise: Congress has been holding hearings to address concerns that cur-
rent SNAP policies may be contributing to the growing obesity rates among low-income SNAP 
participants. Th e House Committee on Agriculture has asked you to analyze whether the SNAP 
program should be amended to prohibit the use of SNAP benefi ts to purchase unhealthy food 
products (such as sugar-sweetened beverages, chips, cookies, and other junk foods). As part of 
your policy analysis, please:
 
■
Describe the pros and cons of the proposed policy.
 
■
List which stakeholders will support it and which will oppose it. What arguments will 
they use to defend their position?
 
■
Prepare a stakeholder analysis to identify the likely positions of (a) low-income advo-
cates (such as anti-hunger groups), (b) public health offi  cials, and (c) the food indus-
try. If you are unable to identify the public positions of the diff erent interest groups 
for each of these policies, present what you think the interest group’s position will be 
(given their positions on other similar proposals).
Learning activity #6:
Conduct a NEMS-S food store audit in three local supermarkets and Nutrition Environment 
Measures Survey for Corner Stores (NEMS-CS) in three local convenience or corner stores (www
.med.upenn.edu/nems/measures.shtml). Describe the methods you use to select the stores and 
describe your results.
Learning activity #7:
Map out all the food stores, farmers’ markets, and restaurants in your county on Google maps. 
Describe any spatial patterns you see in the geographic distribution of these venues. Would you 
advocate for any changes? If so, what types of changes would you suggest?
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
Each time the farm bill is updated, there are many national conversations and contro-
versies regarding funding decisions for various aspects of the farm bill. Based on what 


===PAGE 131===
106 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
you read for this chapter, what would you say are some of the key debates? Based on 
where you would like to practice nutrition in the future, on which side of the debate do 
you think the majority of individuals you work with would align? Please describe some 
reasons for your answer.
2. 
Which federal programs described in the chapter do you think best address food 
insecurity? Please describe reasons for your response. Are there ways these programs 
could be improved to help families even more who are struggling to provide food for 
themselves and their children?
3. 
Th ere are several elements of the food environment that infl uence food and beverage 
consumption at an individual level. Please describe how you personally are infl uenced 
by your food environment at the community or organizational level, and describe a 
policy you think could be enacted in order to address the food environment to make it 
more conducive to healthier eating in your community or organization.
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Read about the 5-year reauthorization of the farm bill, signed by President Trump on December 20, 2018: 
https://www.naco.org/blog/president-signs-fi ve-year-farm-bill-reauthorization-containing-several-key
-wins-counties
Read the Food Research & Action Center (FRAC) report of the fi nal farm bill: https://frac.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018-farm-bill-conference-report-analysis.pdf
Read about the development of the RFEI: https://escholarship.org/content/qt9zc7p54b/qt9zc7p54b.pdf
GLOSSARY
Bill: “Th e primary form of legislative measure used to propose law.”105 Th e proposed measure 
is discussed and voted on by a government or legislative body.
Congress: “Th e United States Congress is made up of the Senate and the House of Represen-
tatives, which is a body of elected offi  cials who represent individual districts in their home 
states.”106
Farm bill: Th e primary agricultural and food law run by the federal government. Th is com-
prehensive bill is passed every 5 years by the U.S. Congress. Topics in the farm bill include nu-
trition and food assistance programs, farm crop prices and income supports, agricultural con-
servation, farm credit, trade, research, rural development, bioenergy, and foreign food aid.24
Food security: Th e USDA defi nes four categories of food security:107
 
■
“High food security: no reported indications of food-access problems or limitations.
 
■
Marginal food security: one or two reported indications—typically of anxiety over 
food suffi  ciency or shortage of food in the house. Little or no indication of changes in 
diets or food intake.
 
■
Low food security: reports of reduced quality, variety, or desirability of diet. Little or no 
indication of reduced food intake.
 
■
Very low food security: Reports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns 
and reduced food intake.”
Health disparities: “Preventable diff erences in the burden of disease, injury, violence, or oppor-
tunities to achieve optimal health that are experienced by socially disadvantaged populations.”108


===PAGE 132===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
107
House of Representatives: Referred to as the “lower house,” the House of Representative mem-
bers vote on and pass laws; the number of House members is determined by state population, 
and a representative's term is 2 years.105
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC): “Th e 
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) provides 
Federal grants to States for supplemental foods, healthcare referrals, and nutrition education 
for low-income pregnant, breastfeeding, and non-breastfeeding postpartum women, and to 
infants and children up to age fi ve who are found to be at nutritional risk.”29
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP): “SNAP off ers nutrition assistance to 
millions of eligible, low-income individuals and families and provides economic benefi ts to 
communities. SNAP is the largest program in the domestic hunger safety net. Th e Food and 
Nutrition Service works with State agencies, nutrition educators, and neighborhood and faith-
based organizations to ensure that those eligible for nutrition assistance can make informed 
decisions about applying for the program and can access benefi ts. FNS also works with State 
partners and the retail community to improve program administration and ensure program 
integrity.”109
U.S. Senate: “Th e upper house of the United States Congress.” Each state elects two senators, 
who serve a term of 6 years.106
REFERENCES
1. Schmidt RH, Archer DL, Olexa MT. Federal Regulation of the Food Industry—Part 2: Federal Regulatory 
Agencies. 2018. http://edis.ifas.ufl .edu/fs121
2. U.S. Department of Agriculture. About the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 2018. https://www.usda.gov/
our-agency/about-usda
3. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. About HHS. 2018. https://www.hhs.gov/about/index
.html
4. Food and Drug Administration. About FDA. 2018. https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/default.htm
5. National Institutes of Health. What We Do. 2018. https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Organization. 2018. https://www.cdc.gov/about/
organization/cio.htm?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fabout%2Forganization
%2Findex.html
7. Environmental Protection Agency. About EPA. 2018. https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa
8. Homeland Security Presidential Directive / HSPD-9. 2004. https://fas.org/irp/off docs/nspd/hspd-9.html
9. Department of Commerce. 2018. https://www.commerce.gov
10. National Institute of Standards and Technology. 2018. https://www.nist.gov
11. Department of Justice. About Department of Justice. 2018. https://www.justice.gov/about
12. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. 2018. https://www.atf.gov/alcohol-tobacco
13. Federal Trade Commission. What We Do. 2018. https://www.ft c.gov/about-ft c/what-we-do
14. U.S. Department of Labor. About Us. 2018. https://www.dol.gov/general/aboutdol
15. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. About OSHA. 2018. https://www.osha.gov/about
.html
16. Grasso VB. Department of Defense Food Procurement: Background and Status. Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Service; 2013. Report No.: RS22190.
17. U.S. Army Medical Department: Veterinary Corps. 2018.
18. U.S. Treasury. Role of the Treasury. 2018. https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/role-of
-the-treasury
19. U.S. Department of Transportation. About Us. 2018. https://www.transportation.gov/mission/about-us
20. U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service. FNS Nutrition Programs. https://www.fns
.usda.gov/programs


===PAGE 133===
108 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
21. National Conference of State Legislatures. Chart of Federal Nutrition Programs. http://www.ncsl.org/
research/human-services/federal-nutrition-programs-chart.aspx. Published March 15, 2018
22. Administration for Community Living. Older Americans Act Nutrition Programs. https://acl.gov/sites/
default/fi les/news%202017-03/OAA-Nutrition_Programs_Fact_Sheet.pdf. Published 2016
23. National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition. What is the Farm Bill? 2018. http://sustainableagriculture.
net/our-work/campaigns/fb campaign/what-is-the-farm-bill
24. Johnson R, Monke J. What Is the Farm Bill? Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service; 2018. 
Report No.: 7-5700.
25. USDA Food and Nutrition Service. Child Nutrition Act of 1966. https://www.fns.usda.gov/child
-nutrition-act-1966
26. U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrion Service. National School Lunch Program. 2018. https://
www.fns.usda.gov/nslp/national-school-lunch-program-nslp
27. U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrion Service. National School Breakfast Program. 2018. 
https://www.fns.usda.gov/sbp/program-history
28. U.S. Department of Agriculture. School Breakfast Program Fact Sheet. https://www.fns.usda.gov/sbp/fact-
sheet. Updated March 31, 2019.
29. USDA Food and Nutrition Service. Th e Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, 
and Children (WIC Program). https://www.fns.usda.gov/wic
30. International Trade Th eory and Policy: Import Tariff s. 2008. http://internationalecon.com/Trade/Tch10/
T10-1.php
31. World Health Organization. About WHO. 2018. http://www.who.int/about/who-we-are/en
32. World Health Organization. Nutrition Topics. 2018. http://www.who.int/nutrition/topics/en
33. World Food Programme. History. 2018. http://www1.wfp.org/history
34. World Food Programme. Overview. 2018. http://www1.wfp.org/overview
35. UNICEF. What We Do. 2018. https://www.unicef.org/what-we-do
36. UNICEF. Nutrition. 2018. https://www.unicef.org/nutrition
37. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations. About FAO. 2018. http://www.fao.org/
about/en
38. Monsivais P, Drewnowski A. Th e rising cost of low-energy-density foods. J Am Diet Assoc. 
2007;107(12):2071–2076. doi:10.1016/j.jada.2007.09.009
39. Drewnowski A, Moudon AV, Jiao J, et al. Food environment and socioeconomic status infl uence obesity 
rates in Seattle and in Paris. Int J Obes. 2014;38(2):306–314. doi:10.1038/ijo.2013.97
40. Larson NI, Story MT, Nelson MC. Neighborhood environments: disparities in access to healthy foods in 
the US. Am J Prev Med. 2009;36(1):74–84.e10. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.09.025
41. Glanz K, Sallis JF, Saelens BE, Frank LD. Healthy nutrition environments: concepts and measures. Am J 
Health Promot. 2005;19(5):330–333. doi:10.4278/0890-1171-19.5.330
42. Sharkey JR. Measuring potential access to food stores and food-service places in rural areas in the US. 
Am J Prev Med. 2009;36(4):S151–S155. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2009.01.004
43. Glanz K, Sallis JF, Saelens BE, Frank LD. Nutrition environment measures survey in stores (NEMS-S): 
development and evaluation. Am J Prev Med. 2007;32(4):282–289. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2006.12.019
44. Byker Shanks C, Jilcott Pitts S, Gustafson A. Development and validation of a farmers’ market audit tool in 
rural and urban communities. Health Promot Pract. 2015;16(6):859–866. doi:10.1177/1524839915597899
45. Rimkus L, Powell LM, Zenk SN, et al. Development and reliability testing of a food store observation 
form. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2013;45(6):540–548. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2013.02.005
46. Holzman DC. White House proposes healthy food fi nancing initiative. Environ Health Perspect. 
2010;118(4):A156. doi:10.1289/ehp.118-a156
47. Dubowitz T, Ghosh-Dastidar M, Cohen DA, et al. Diet and perceptions change with supermarket 
introduction in a food desert, but not because of supermarket use. Health Aff  (Millwood). 
2015;34(11):1858–1868. doi:10.1377/hlthaff .2015.0667
48. Elbel B, Mijanovich T, Kiszko K, et al. Th e introduction of a supermarket via tax-credits in a low-
income area: the infl uence on purchasing and consumption. Am J Health Promot. 2017;31(1):59–66. 
doi:10.4278/ajhp.150217-QUAN-733
49. Elbel B, Moran A, Dixon LB, et al. Assessment of a government-subsidized supermarket in a high-need 
area on household food availability and children’s dietary intakes. Public Health Nutr. 2015:18(15):2881–
2890. doi:10.1017/S1368980015000282


===PAGE 134===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
109
50. Pitts SBJ, Wu Q, McGuirt JT, et al. Impact on dietary choices aft er discount supermarket opens in low-
income community. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2018;50(7):729–735. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2018.03.002
51. Feldstein LM. General Plans and Zoning: A Toolkit for Building Healthy, Vibrant Communities. 
Sacramento, CA: California Department of Health Care Services; 2007.
52. Mair JS, Pierce MW, Teret SP. Th e Use of Zoning to Restrict Fast Food Outlets: A Potential Strategy to 
Combat Obesity. Washington, DC: Johns Hopkins and Georgetown Universities; 2005. http://www
.jhsph.edu/center-for-law-and-the-publics-health/research/Z
53. Sturm R, Hattori A. Diet and obesity in Los Angeles County 2007–2012: is there a measurable eff ect of 
the 2008 “fast-food ban”? Soc Sci Med. 2015;133:205–211. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.03.004
54. Institute of Medicine. WIC Food Packages: Time for a Change. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 2006.
55. Ashe M, Jernigan D, Kline R, Galaz R. Land use planning and the control of alcohol, tobacco, fi rearms, 
and fast food restaurants. Am J Public Health. 2003;93(9):1404–1408. doi:10.2105/AJPH.93.9.1404
56. Lydon CA, Rohmeier KD, Sophia CY, et al. How far do you have to go to get a cheeseburger around 
here? Th e realities of an environmental design approach to curbing the consumption of fast-food. Behav 
Soc Issues. 2011;20:6–23. doi:10.5210/bsi.v20i0.3637
57. Zenk SN, Odoms-Young A, Powell LM, et al. Fruit and vegetable availability and selection: federal food 
package revisions, 2009. Am J Prev Med. 2012;43(4):423–428. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.06.017
58. Andreyeva T, Luedicke J, Middleton AE, et al. Positive infl uence of the revised Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children food packages on access to healthy foods. J Acad 
Nutr Diet. 2012;112(6):850–858. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2012.02.019
59. Andreyeva T, Luedicke J, Middleton AE, et al. Changes in Access to Healthy Foods aft er Implementation 
of the WIC Food Package Revisions. New Haven, CT: Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity, Yale 
University; 2011.
60. Zenk SN, Powell LM, Odoms-Young AM, et al. Impact of the revised Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) food package policy on fruit and vegetable prices. J 
Acad Nutr Diet. 2014;114(2):288–296. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2013.08.003
61. Lu W, McKyer ELJ, Dowdy D, et al. Evaluating the infl uence of the Revised Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) food allocation package on healthy food 
availability, accessibility, and aff ordability in Texas. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2016;116(2):292–301. doi:10.1016/j
.jand.2015.10.021
62. Kong A, Odoms-Young AM, Schiff er LA, et al. Th e 18-month impact of special supplemental nutrition 
program for women, infants, and children food package revisions on diets of recipient families. Am J 
Prev Med. 2014;46(6):543–551. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2014.01.021
63. Schultz DJ, Shanks CB, Houghtaling B. Th e impact of the 2009 special supplemental nutrition program 
for women, infants, and children food package revisions on participants: a systematic review. J Acad 
Nutr Diet. 2015;115(11):1832–1846. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2015.06.381
64. Haynes-Maslow L, Andress L, Pitts SJ, et al. Arguments used in public comments to support or oppose 
the US Department of Agriculture’s Minimum Stocking Requirements: a content analysis. J Acad Nutr 
Diet. 2018;118:1664–1672. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2017.12.005
65. Ross A, Krishnan N, Ruggiero C, et al. A mixed methods assessment of the barriers and readiness 
for meeting the SNAP depth of stock requirements in Baltimore’s small food stores. Ecol Food Nutr. 
2018;57(2):94–108. doi:10.1080/03670244.2017.1416362
66. Colchero MA, Rivera-Dommarco J, Popkin BM, Ng SW. In Mexico, evidence of sustained consumer 
response two years aft er implementing a sugar-sweetened beverage tax. Health Aff . 2017;36(3):564–571. 
doi:10.1377/hlthaff .2016.1231
67. Jacobson MF, Krieger J, Brownell KD. Potential policy approaches to address diet-related diseases. 
JAMA. 2018;320:341. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.7434
68. Backholer K, Blake M, Vandevijvere S. Sugar-sweetened beverage taxation: an update on the year that 
was 2017. Public Health Nutr. 2017;20(18):3219–3224. doi:10.1017/S1368980017003329
69. Snowdon W, Th ow AM. Trade policy and obesity prevention: challenges and innovation in the Pacifi c 
Islands. Obes Rev. 2013;14:150–158. doi:10.1111/obr.12090
70. Sinclair SE, Cooper M, Mansfi eld ED. Th e infl uence of menu labeling on calories selected or consumed: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2014;114(9):1375–1388.e15. doi:10.1016/j
.jand.2014.05.014


===PAGE 135===
110 
I. Foundations of Public Health Nutrition
71. Welker E, Lott M, Story M. Th e school food environment and obesity prevention: progress over the last 
decade. Curr Obes Rep. 2016;5(2):145–155. doi:10.1007/s13679-016-0204-0
72. Alaimo K, Oleksyk SC, Drzal NB, et al. Eff ects of changes in lunch-time competitive foods, 
nutrition practices, and nutrition policies on low-income middle-school children’s diets. Child Obes. 
2013;9(6):509–523. doi:10.1089/chi.2013.0052
73. Terry-McElrath YM, O’Malley PM, Johnston LD. Potential impact of national school nutritional 
environment policies: cross-sectional associations with US secondary student overweight/obesity, 2008-
2012. JAMA Pediatr. 2015;169(1):78–85. doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.2048
74. Micha R, Karageorgou D, Bakogianni I, et al. Eff ectiveness of school food environment policies on 
children’s dietary behaviors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS One. 2018;13(3):e0194555. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0194555
75. Babey SH, Diamant AL, Hastert TA, Harvey S. Designed for Disease: Th e Link Between Local Food 
Environments and Obesity and Diabetes. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Center for Health Policy Research; 2008.
76. Jilcott Pitts SB, Wu Q, McGuirt JT, et al. Associations between access to farmers’ markets and 
supermarkets, shopping patterns, fruit and vegetable consumption and health indicators among women 
of reproductive age in eastern North Carolina, U.S.A. Public Health Nutr. 2013;16(11):1944–1952. 
doi:10.1017/S1368980013001389
77. Jilcott SB, Keyserling T, Crawford T, et al. Examining associations among obesity and per capita 
farmers’ markets, grocery stores/supermarkets, and supercenters in US counties. J Am Diet Assoc. 
2011;111(4):567–572. doi:10.1016/j.jada.2011.01.010
78. Laska MN, Hearst MO, Forsyth A, et al. Neighbourhood food environments: are they associated with 
adolescent dietary intake, food purchases and weight status? Public Health Nutr. 2010;13(11):1757–
1763. doi:10.1017/S1368980010001564
79. Laska MN, Pelletier J. Minimum Stocking Levels and Marketing Strategies of Healthful Foods for Small 
Retail Food Stores. Durham, NC: Healthy Eating Research; 2016.
80. Karpyn A, DeWeese RS, Pelletier JE, et al. Examining the feasibility of healthy minimum stocking 
standards for small food stores. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2018;118:1655–1663. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2017.12.006
81. Cooksey-Stowers K, Schwartz MB, Brownell KD. Food swamps predict obesity rates better than food 
deserts in the United States. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(11):1366. doi:10.3390/ijerph14111366
82. Walker RE, Keane CR, Burke JG. Disparities and access to healthy food in the United States: a review of 
food deserts literature. Health Place. 2010;16(5):876–884. doi:10.1016/j.healthplace.2010.04.013
83. Ver Ploeg M. Access to Aff ordable and Nutritious Food: Measuring and Understanding Food Deserts and 
Th eir Consequences: Report to Congress. Collingdale, PA: Diane Publishing; 2010.
84. Ver Ploeg M, Dutko P, Breneman V. Measuring food access and food deserts for policy purposes. Appl 
Econ Perspect Policy. 2014;37(2):205–225. doi:10.1093/aepp/ppu035
85. Zenk SN, Tarlov E, Wing C, et al. Geographic accessibility of food outlets not associated with body 
mass index change among veterans, 2009–14. Health Aff . 2017;36(8):1433–1442. doi:10.1377/
hlthaff .2017.0122
86. Lamb KE, Th ornton LE, Olstad DL, et al. Associations between major chain fast-food outlet availability 
and change in body mass index: a longitudinal observational study of women from Victoria, Australia. 
BMJ Open. 2017;7(10):e016594. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2017-016594
87. Laraia BA, Downing JM, Zhang YT, et al. Food environment and weight change: does residential mobility 
matter? Th e Diabetes Study of Northern California (DISTANCE). Am J Epidemiol. 2017;185(9):743–
750. doi:10.1093/aje/kww167
88. Evans AE, Jennings R, Smiley AW, et al. Introduction of farm stands in low-income communities 
increases fruit and vegetable among community residents. Health Place. 2012;18(5):1137–1143. 
doi:10.1016/j.healthplace.2012.04.007
89. Ma X, Liese AD, Hibbert J, et al. Th e association between food security and store-specifi c and overall 
food shopping behaviors. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2017;117(12):1931–1940. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2017.02.007
90. Gittelsohn J, Laska MN, Karpyn A, et al. Lessons learned from small store programs to increase healthy 
food access. Am J Health Behav. 2014;38(2):307–315. doi:10.5993/AJHB.38.2.16
91. Jilcott Pitts SB, Wu Q, Truesdale KP, et al. Baseline assessment of a healthy corner store initiative: 
associations between food store environments, shopping patterns, customer purchases, and dietary 
intake in Eastern North Carolina. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(10):1189. doi:10.3390/
ijerph14101189


===PAGE 136===
 
5. Public Health and Food Policy: Role in Public Health Nutrition 
111
92. Katz DL, Njike VY, Rhee LQ, et al. Performance characteristics of NuVal and the Overall Nutritional 
Quality Index (ONQI). Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;91(4):1102S–1108S. doi:10.3945/ajcn.2010.28450E
93. Seguin RA, Morgan EH, Hanson KL, et al. Farm Fresh Foods for Healthy Kids (F3HK): an innovative 
community supported agriculture intervention to prevent childhood obesity in low-income families 
and strengthen local agricultural economies. BMC Public Health. 2017;17(1):306. doi:10.1186/s12889
-017-4202-2
94. Philipp BL, Merewood A, Miller LW, et al. Baby-friendly hospital initiative improves breastfeeding 
initiation rates in a US hospital setting. Pediatrics. 2001;108(3):677–681. doi:10.1542/peds.108.3.677
95. Jilcott Pitts S, Graham J, Mojica A, et al. Implementing healthier foodservice guidelines in hospital and 
federal worksite cafeterias: barriers, facilitators and keys to success. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2016;29(6):677–
686. doi:10.1111/jhn.12380
96. Partnership for a Healthier America [Internet]. 2018. Retrieved from https://www.ahealthieramerica
.org
97. Gaihre S, Kyle J, Semple S, et al. Type and extent of trans-disciplinary co-operation to improve food 
security, health and household environment in low and middle income countries: systematic review. 
BMC Public Health. 2016;16(1):1093. doi:10.1186/s12889-016-3731-4
98. Hersey J, Lynch C, Williams-Piehota P, et al. Th e association between funding for statewide programs and 
enactment of obesity legislation. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2010;42(1):51–56. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2009.05.005
99. Holton-Hodson R, Brousseau R. Strengthening a state’s health advocacy infrastructure. Health Aff . 
2006;25(3):856–859. doi:10.1377/hlthaff .25.3.856
100. Vandevijvere S, Mackay S, Swinburn B. Measuring and stimulating progress on implementing 
widely recommended food environment policies: the New Zealand case study. Health Res Policy Syst. 
2018;16(1):3. doi:10.1186/s12961-018-0278-0
101. Pitts SBJ, Acheson MLM, Ward RK, et al. Disparities in healthy food zoning, farmers’ market 
availability, and fruit and vegetable consumption among North Carolina residents. Arch Public Health. 
2015;73(1):1. doi:10.1186/s13690-015-0085-9
102. Mayo ML, Pitts SB, Chriqui JF. Associations between county and municipality zoning ordinances and 
access to fruit and vegetable outlets in rural North Carolina, 2012. Prev Chronic Dis. 2013;10:E203. 
doi:10.5888/pcd10.130196
103. Schiff  R. Th e role of food policy councils in developing sustainable food systems. J Hunger Environ 
Nutr. 2008;3(2–3):206–228. doi:10.1080/19320240802244017
104. Scherb A, Palmer A, Frattaroli S, Pollack K. Exploring food system policy: a survey of food policy 
councils in the United States. J Agric Food Syst Community Dev. 2016;2(4):3–14. doi:10.5304/
jafscd.2012.024.007
105. Legislative Glossary. 2020. https://www.congress.gov/help/legislative-glossary
106. Vocabulary.com Dictionary. 2020. https://www.vocabulary.com/dictionary/House%20of%20Represen
tatives
107. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Defi nitions of Food Security. 2018. https://
www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/definitions-of-food
-security.aspx
108. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Health and Program Services (CHAPS): 
Health Disparities Among Racial/Ethnic Populations. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services; 2008.
109. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). 2018. https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/
supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap


===PAGE 138===
II
CULTURAL ASPECTS OF PUBLIC 
HEALTH NUTRITION


===PAGE 140===
6
FOOD AND CULTURE IMPORTANCE 
IN PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
CAROL ANNE HARTWICK-PFLAUM, JOHN COVENEY, DAVID N. COX, 
AND CLAUDE FISCHLER
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Discuss the ways in which culture manifests as diff erent foodways.
2. Describe some of the major diff erences in food cultures and the associated public health 
issues.
3. Describe ways of achieving public health nutrition goals and being respectful to cultural 
diff erences.
INTRODUCTION
Culture is now recognized to be a foundational imperative for food choice and food identity. Th e 
endurance of culture is embedded in the everyday experiences of individuals, groups, and societ-
ies. It is visible in habits, choices, morals, and codes of practice that unite people. Although cultures 
may have very similar roots, they can oft en diff er signifi cantly in material expression. Th e sociol-
ogist Pierre Bourdieu is famous for noting that class structures—working class, middle class, and 
so on—are actually cultural structures, with each class having its own means of expressing habits. 
Bourdieu’s book Distinctions: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste describes the ways in 
which class is an expression of culture. For food habits, culture plays a signifi cant role in food and 
dietary choices. Sometimes these roles are only visible when one culture is compared with another, 
revealing stark diff erences and contrasts. Th ese distinctions are oft en overlooked when public 
health nutrition programs are planned, developed, and executed. Furthermore, the appreciation of 
cultural distinctions requires knowledge and skills that are oft en missing from the capacities with 
public health nutrition teams. More recently, talent from social sciences and anthropology has been 
incorporated into the development of public health nutrition programs to capture the role played 
by culture and social class. Multidisciplinary approaches addressing problems of diet-related dis-
eases are now believed to have the best chances of meeting aims and objectives. Unfortunately, 
however, the need to acknowledge cultural distinctions is overlooked and programs developed in 
one jurisdiction are oft en imported into another without recognition of cultural diff erence. Part of 
this chapter describes the ways in which culture played an important role in the success of a public 
health nutrition program, which was developed in one culture and was introduced into another 
without recognition of cultural diff erences. Th e lessons learned are also discussed.


===PAGE 141===
116 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Cultural Vignette*
We met as planned at Lunel station. I thought the train would be late and would upset our plans 
to shop at Les Halles in Lunel central. But no, it arrived right on time. Louis was standing at the 
platform, looking for my familiar face. It was good to see him there. We greeted each other in the 
familiar southern France manner and headed over to his car. As we climbed in, we off ered each other 
the usual salutations: “how well are you going” and “how is life right now.” For Louis, this is always 
a tricky question. He is an architect, and his life is infl uenced by his work, which comes in peaks 
and troughs. So his response is oft en unexpected, when he tells you how good (plentiful) or not good 
(bleak) is his workload.
Sunday morning in Lunel central is wonderful. Always very crowded, with the pavement cafes 
full of folk sunning themselves in the morning sunshine. But being crowded brings its own problems, 
especially with parking and fi nding somewhere to put the car. Louis’s familiarity with Lunel meant 
that he fell back on experience, which gave him the chance to fi nd something others would not have 
noticed. Lunel is probably typical of small to medium towns in southern France. A main square with 
lots of cafes, shops, offi  cial buildings taking up most of the space.
Out of the car and into the food hall. Bags in hand. First stop, the poissonnerie (fi sh stall) for 
ingredients of an entrée we would be eating at lunch. Oyster, prawns, periwinkles. I watch Louis’s 
trained eye move slowly over the off erings. I saw his nose twitch as he sniff ed the air that told him 
how long the shellfi sh had been out of water. His eyes moved on to an adjacent stall selling much 
the same products, and to my untrained eye, what looked to be very similar degrees of freshness. But 
Louis obviously saw diff erently. A look of satisfaction told me he was more satisfi ed with off erings 
over here. Similar experience at the fruit and vegetable stalls. He seems to know what is available and 
where. He also seems to know what is in season and thus what is to be bought and thus cooked. At an 
earlier visit, I expressed an interest in cardoons, which I had never eaten. Louis told me this was the 
cardoon season and toured the local fruit and vegetable shops arriving eventually at one with reliable 
supply, which then comprised the central dish that evening. I off ered to buy the cheese. What would 
be reliable and suitable for our meal which we would cook and eat together later? Th e aged Cantal 
would be good and some soft  goat cheese. Th at will do just fi ne. Back to the car with bags heaving. 
Homeward bound.
What was obvious here was the sense of experience, trust in decisions, and engagement directly 
with the food that we were buying. Louis seemed to bring all his senses to the experience of deciding 
what to eat and choosing the best ingredients. Because most of the food came unprocessed even 
unwrapped, there were not signatures or signposts on labels that could be used to guide choice or 
purchase. What mattered here was the direct engagement with the food and bringing to that the 
years of observation, experience, and with this a confi dence in food purchasing. But not only in the 
buying of food because in the kitchen later the same levels of experience and know-how were also 
on show.
Th e dominance of the central fridges, cold cabinets, and the racks and shelves of packaged food 
products—and a strange yet familiar odour—was the hallmark of the shopping experience with Katy. 
We agreed to meet at the entrance to a large shopping mall and go off  to the supermarket together. 
Katy was fi tting our meeting into her busy architect practice schedule and was shopping for a family 
of four, including two children under 10 years old, and one of them—the 4-year-old—in tow. Katy 
made it clear that food shopping was not her favourite activity, especially with an accompanying 
child. So there was a need to be effi  cient and well organized. But, hey, no cutting corners and going 
* Th is vignette was fi rst published in Coveney J, Booth S, eds. Critical Dietetics and Critical Nutrition Studies. 
New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company; 2019 and is reproduced here with permission.


===PAGE 142===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
117
for the quick and dirties because like most parents and food providers, Katy wanted to ensure that 
family meals were healthy and tasty. Aft er cruising through the fruit and vegetable section, near the 
entrance, like almost all supermarkets, we fi nd ourselves at the fridges. Katy fi nds that the shelves 
with her usual brands of yoghurt and cheese are empty. So she is in the process of fi nding others. Her 
eyes scanning the alternative off erings Katy fi nds herself choosing between one product over another. 
Th e labels of each are replete with information about contents and provenance. But the most import-
ant decision maker is the Health Star Rating† that occupies almost a third of the front of pack. No 
need to dwell on the decision for too long because the one with 4 stars is a clear winner over the oth-
ers, 3 star and 3.5 star, respectively. Katy fi nds herself applying this logic, based on science, to almost 
all her food purchasing decisions. Th at is to say, she relies on a scientifi c appraisal of the food, relayed 
through the Health Star Rating system, to inform her about the quality of the food she is purchasing. 
“Quality” here meaning nutritional contents.
We are out of the supermarket in super quick time, and back to her car where we load up the boot 
with our bought items.
So, we have descriptions here of two shopping expeditions separated by geographical distance, 
culture, and language. But the main separation is between an appraisal of food quality relying on 
experience, familiarity, and know-how. Or rather, diff erent types of experience, familiarity, and 
know-how. For Louis, his repository of knowledge about food, accumulated over years of shoul-
dering the family responsibility for food provisioning, is employed to seek out and choose what he 
understood to be quality. His knowingness of and familiarity with the off erings at Les Halles allowed 
him to be in command of his food purchases. For Katy, there is another kind of knowingness; one 
informed by nutritional science, and ipso facto, requiring deciphering to make it intelligible for 
the majority of shoppers. Katy needed to have the nutrition facts and fi gures concentrated into 
one visual representation: the Health Star Rating system. But there is another diff erence between 
the two shopping experiences. Louis’s culture, that of the French food culture, will have supplied 
him with the products of centuries of savoir and connaissance: know-how and know-what. Th e 
Cantal cheese, the goat cheese, and many of the other purchases come from a long historical line of 
food production and food manufacturing. Granted some of these may have been modernized and 
industrialized. But even so one can see elements of an unchanging process; like the chestnut leaves 
that are wrapping the goat cheese, a practice that harks back to the time when these cheeses were 
wrapped and stored over winter months. Th at is to say, Louis lives in a deep food culture. Deep in 
terms of its history and its tradition.
Coming from a “soft ” food culture, Katy relies on very diff erent senses and sensibilities. With no 
roots to anchor her food practices into history and tradition, Katy uses modern methods of knowl-
edge—based on scientifi c, more modern rationalities—to inform her decision-making processes. In 
this way, she is reliant less on her own innate experiences and expertise, and more on the scientifi c 
knowledge embedded in and displayed by the Health Star Rating system. She is by this fact, a more 
passive shopper.
CONTEXT OF CULTURE
Although Louis and Katy are attached to similar cultural roots, the preceding example demon-
strates that they derive from diff erent cultures and one of the most noticeable features of a culture 
is its ability to defi ne and protect its food culture.
† For a full description of Health Star Ratings in Australia and New Zealand, see: http://healthstarrating.gov
.au/internet/healthstarrating/publishing.nsf/Content/About-health-stars


===PAGE 143===
118 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
CULTURE AND FOODWAYS
To notice that diff erent cultures eat diff erent foods is to observe the ways in which human popu-
lations have sought diff erent sources of food as their culture. It becomes obvious that what some 
cultures regard as food, other cultures see as nonfood. We call this kind of division “food classifi -
cation.” Helman1 has usefully described this and other classifi cations:
 
■
Food versus nonfood
 
■
Sacred versus profane foods
 
■
Food as medicine and medicine as food
 
■
Social foods (which designate various social status and occupation groupings)
Food Versus Nonfood
Th e observation by some that diff erent cultures eat diff erent foods suggests that there is some 
functionality in the decision to eat this and not that. For example, some cultures eat the meat from 
dog, and many others do not. Th e reason for not eating dog is, it is oft en suggested, because in 
non–dog-eating cultures dogs play a useful role in protection, hunting, and even companionship 
and, as such, are not valued for their meat. However, this “functionalist” argument only goes so 
far, and falls apart when cultures that value live dogs, or indeed other animals, also see them as 
food. For example, camels are valued in northern Saharan Africa for the transport and other func-
tions they serve. And camel meat is available for purchase in all marketplaces where the camel is 
a transport animal. Quite why some foods are nonfoods is still a cultural mystery.
Sacred Versus Profane Foods
Th e term “profane” here is used to indicate it is outside the edible considerations for some reli-
gious communities. For example, pork is forbidden (taboo or harem) in Islamic and Jewish cul-
tures. Some Hindu cultures eschew cow meat. Others, Jains, forbid consumption of all fl esh and 
other animal products, such as dairy foods. Some cultures follow a rule of fasting during certain 
periods, for example, Ramadan in the Islamic culture and Easter in Greek Orthodox. In a study 
of diff erent faith-based foodways, we noticed that the admission or prohibition of various foods 
by particular religious groups is a way of creating “in” and “out” communities. Th at is to say, food 
choice was a marker of belonging and community.2 
TRADITIONAL AND THERAPEUTIC USES OF FOODS IN RURAL, URBAN, 
AND GLOBAL COMMUNITIES
Food as Medicine and Medicine as Food
Th e relationship between food and medicine is one that is evident in most if not all human cul-
tures. In Western culture, for example, early writings by the Greeks and Romans indicate that 
food was medicine and medicine was food. Treating various maladies required attention to diet 
and dietetics (“diete”—the daily regime). Th is was never so apparent as in the theory of humors, 
which dominated Western medicine until relatively recently. Th e system was based on a belief 
that the body relied on four fl uids, or humors, that circulated throughout the system. Th e fl uids 
had independent properties, but they also had a relationship with each other, so careful balance 
of the humors was required. Th e humoral fl uids were blood, yellow bile (or choler), black bile, 


===PAGE 144===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
119
and phlegm. Each of these was credited with having diff erent and distinctive eff ects on the body, 
making it more or less vulnerable to various sicknesses. So having too much of one humor could 
create a susceptibility to particular diseases.
Many cultures still adhere to the humoral version (or similar) of the creation of health and 
sickness. For example, in a study of Vietnamese women who were breastfeeding,51 we noticed that 
mothers obeyed rules concerning foods considered to be “heating” (but not temperature-wise) 
and foods thought to be “cooling” (again, not temperature-wise). Th e food characteristics of heat-
ing and cooling were considered to help or hinder the quality of breast milk. Similar observations 
have been made in other cultures.
Social Foods (Which Designate Various Social Status and 
Occupation Groupings)
As Mary Douglas and Mike Nicod found out in a foundational research project,3 food and meals 
follow a particular “language” and format within particular social groups. Formal meals, for 
example, have a sequence that is common and recognized with diff erent courses following one 
aft er another. It is also possible to see diff erent subgroups within social classes. For example, in 
one research project on “food in the family setting,”4 we noticed that parents in more socially 
advantaged groups used the language of nutritional sciences (vitamins, minerals, calories) when 
describing some of the concerns they harbored about fussy eating habits in children. On the 
other hand, in parents in less advantaged groups, we noticed that the vocabulary was more about 
children being “fi t,” “active,” and “robust” in relation to food choice. Th ese examples demonstrate 
that working with communities in which there are diff erent cultural and social groupings, a one-
size-fi ts-all approach is likely to be inappropriate and even disrespectful. Public health nutrition 
programs need to be tailored with their respective cultural groups. Th e next section describes how 
this is best achieved.
Development of Culturally Appropriate Programs and Interventions 
in Diverse Communities
Th e development of programs in one culture and transferring to another culture is a frequent 
fi nding in the area of public health nutrition and health promotion. Indeed, the robustness of a 
methodology or an analytical framework has oft en been measured by the ability to transfer to 
another setting, oft en in a diff erent culture. However, several works have highlighted method-
ological issues to consider when conducting research cross-culturally. For example, Triandis and 
Brislin5 outline some of the issues that oft en limit cross-cultural research.
First, similar concepts may have diff erent meanings across cultures. For example, Fischler and 
Masson6 demonstrate that the notion of “eating well” may have a nutritional meaning in some 
cultures compared to a social meaning in others. On this point, Sekaran7 believes that ensuring 
functional equivalence is a major methodological goal, arguing that it requires ensuring that the 
behavior in question developed in diff erent cultures in response to similar problems is shared by 
the diff erent social or cultural groups.
In our research, we have explored the triggers for specifi c behaviors in each culture under 
examination, and therefore we not only studied behaviors such as eating or learning about food; 
rather, we observed these habits within their cultural contexts in order to understand the issues 
they respond to. For example, in research on a program called EPODE (Ensemble, Prevenons 
l’Obesite Des Enfants) and its genesis in France, we explored its transference to Australia, where 
it was called OPAL (Obesity Prevention and Lifestyle). We found that, although both EPODE 


===PAGE 145===
120 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
and OPAL were created in response to a believed obesity epidemic in each jurisdiction, the French 
program holds a primary focus on the preservation of cultural and traditional habits, while the 
Australian program sought to disrupt current eating habits by replacing so-called nonhealthy 
with healthier food choices.
Second, Sekaran raises the issue of language and translation. She claims that vocabulary, idiom-
atic, grammatical, and experiential equivalences should be verifi ed in instrument development.7 
Triandis and Brislin state that the translation of research tools or data leaves room for discrep-
ancies due to the subjective interpretation of meanings or diff erences in the range of vocabulary 
from one language to another. Th e French language, for example, has a much richer vocabulary 
and diff erent expressions around food and eating than English does. Whereas English speakers 
say, “I’m full” when they would like to stop eating, the French say, “Je n’ai plus faim” (I am not 
hungry anymore). In the research reported on EPODE and OPAL, we met this challenge through 
the primary researcher’s profi ciency in both languages. Interviews were conducted directly in 
French and English, and French transcripts were translated by the researcher who conserved 
French expressions in parentheses when it was felt that the meanings of respondent discourses 
were compromised.
Th ird, failure to combine research methods and approaches to analyses to cross-check fi nd-
ings also makes cross-cultural research a challenge. In light of the challenges that cross-cultural 
research holds, extra precautions should be taken to verify the validity of the cross-cultural 
data collected5 and to base data analyses on multivariate techniques.7 Exploring the same 
phenomenon through diff erent means allows for this. In the EPODE and OPAL programs, 
although our research focused primarily on the interviews conducted with selected partic-
ipants, the researcher conducted situational observations and dedicated several months to 
exploring and experiencing herself the EPODE and OPAL programs within their respective 
cultural contexts.
Fourth, the issue of timing of data collection is essential to cross-cultural research.7 In order 
to ensure response equivalence, the research should be conducted at equivalent times for each 
group.7 We could broaden this point to consider the environments within which obesity preven-
tion initiatives are implemented. When transferring obesity prevention methodologies cross-cul-
turally, it is important to consider the relevance of the messages for the specifi c time and place in 
the host context.
Finally, Leung and Bond8 raise the important point that the samples should be representative 
of the population and comparable. Of course, when conducting cross-cultural research, ensuring 
comparability is not easy and special precautions should be taken. What follows is an examination 
of the EPODE and OPAL programs in depth to illustrate the points made earlier.
Global Childhood Obesity Prevention
Nutrition and health programs for the prevention of childhood obesity have been developed in 
abundance in the past 10 to 20 years, and some global strategies have been explored. Borys and 
colleagues claim that “universal community interventions are the most eff ective in terms of obe-
sity prevention on the condition that a methodological framework is used.”9 Following the World 
Health Organization (WHO) Ottawa Charter for health promotion published in 1986, there 
has been a change in emphasis from individual behavior focus to public policy, communities, 
environments, and health services.10 Th is chapter reports on research conducted in two diff erent 
jurisdictions, France and Australia, and compares and contrasts methodologies, outcomes, and 
consequences.


===PAGE 146===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
121
Evidence shows that obesity prevention and treatment are more eff ective in childhood than on 
adults.11–15 Th e most important prevention strategy is believed to be a public health model that 
focuses on school children and individuals at a young age.16,17
Childhood obesity is a serious global problem. In 2004, according to the International Obesity 
Task Force (IOTF; now known as World Obesity Clinical Care) criteria, it was estimated that 
~10% of children worldwide aged 5 to 17 years were overweight.18 Nutrition and health pro-
grams for the prevention of childhood obesity have been developed in the past 10 to 20 years and 
some global strategies have been explored. Some prevention models include programs that have 
been developed in one country and transferred and implemented in others, such as L.E.A.D. (for 
Locate the evidence, Evaluate the evidence, Assemble the evidence, and inform Decisions) and 
ANGELO (Analysis Grid for Elements Linked to Obesity), EPODE models.19–22 Th e conditions 
for the successful cultural transfer of these programs are currently unknown.
Community-Based Childhood Obesity Prevention
Reviews have examined the determinants of healthy lifestyles and support models that address 
childhood obesity prevention from a community perspective.23,24 Holistic approaches to child-
hood obesity prevention consider the collective characteristics of a society and its norms that 
infl uence individual behavior.25 Kumanyika et al. claims that “education alone is not suffi  cient to 
change weight-related behaviours. Environmental and societal intervention are also required to 
promote and support behaviour change.”26
Davison and Birch27 argue the usefulness of the Ecological Systems Th eory (EST) to incorpo-
rate all factors involved in the development of childhood overweight and obesity. Such a commu-
nity-focused model should include “children’s dietary and activity patterns, parenting practices 
that shape children’s dietary and activity practices, the environment in which parenting takes 
place” and “child characteristics, such as gender and age, that infl uence parenting practices and 
moderate the impact of risk factors on the development of overweight.”27 Th ey suggest that this 
comprehensive model would facilitate the development of eff ective obesity prevention strategies 
within communities.
Swinburn and colleagues divide the community food environment into three categories in an 
attempt to understand and dissect the obesogenic environment: physical (what is available), eco-
nomic, political (what the costs are), and sociocultural (what the rules, attitudes, and beliefs are).17 
Ecological models for health promotion show that education-based interventions associated with 
social support and environmental changes minimize the barriers to healthy food and lifestyle 
habits have a higher potential for change.21,28–30
Community-based childhood obesity prevention models using environmental and nutrition 
interventions, for example, are designed to “alter food environment determinants of exces-
sive weight gain in children within an interdependent population in a society before obesity 
arises.”31 Th ese programs function as the composition of community, political, physical, and 
economic, food environment interventions and appear eff ective over a period of 2 months to 3 
years in generating signifi cant community food behavior change that contributes to the reduc-
tion in the prevalence of childhood obesity.31 Swinburn and colleagues claim that although 
more evidence is needed for environmental approaches to obesity prevention, the strength in 
the approach lies in its ability to easily reach large numbers of people through even modest 
environmental impacts.17
In France, community-based obesity prevention interventions are prevalent, and the coun-
try is characterized by the overarching presence of the national educational campaign on 


===PAGE 147===
122 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
nutrition and health (known as PNNS). Th e French EPODE program, which was informed 
by the PNNS, has been franchised and exported into several communities globally, including 
to Australia.
In Australia, community-based obesity prevention programs have been developed in dif-
ferent states. One of the best known examples is the Eat Well Be Active communities, which 
have a goal of contributing to the healthy weight of children and young people in two com-
munities in South Australia.32 Th e program used a community development and community 
capacity building approach to place the intervention community at the center of the program’s 
implementation.33 It adopted the Social-Ecological Model, highlighting the interrelationships 
between individuals and their environment and the importance of infl uencing both to stimu-
late sustainable change.34
To summarize so far, childhood is regarded to be the most eff ective part of the life course with 
which to engage for the prevention of obesity, and a number of childhood-focused programs 
exist. Th e most eff ective program models appear to be community-based, and many examples 
of community-based models exist and there has been adoption of programs from one cultural 
milieu to another.
CONCLUSION
Th is chapter provides examples of the ways in which culture operates to infl uence food choice 
and eating habits. It provides a number of examples that compare and contrast food cultures 
demonstrating that even within the same cultural roots, food habits can be very diff erence. Last, 
the chapter describes the importance of careful adaptation of public health programs so as to 
appreciate cultural diff erences.
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Culture as a marker of diff erences and distinctions
2. 
Foodways as examples of the ways in which diff erent food habits are expressed
3. 
Cross-cultural approaches as forms of inquiry that privilege socio/cultural diff erences
CASE STUDY: COMPARING THE EPODE PROGRAM 
IN FRANCE AND THE OPAL PROGRAM IN AUSTRALIA
Th ere is contention about the extent to which programs developed in one jurisdiction can be 
transported and transplanted in another and remain eff ective. An example is the EPODE pro-
gram developed in France and franchised internationally and, specifi cally for the research 
reported here, in Australia. As such, we wanted to identify the conditions for cultural transfer of 
the EPODE program to OPAL, its Australian equivalent. Our objectives were therefore to:
1. 
Examine the methods, practices, and principles of EPODE and OPAL programs.
2. 
Compare and contrast how the programs were deployed on the ground.
3. 
Identify the considerations important for cross-cultural transfers in public health.


===PAGE 148===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
123
Findings
EPODE
EPODE methodology
Th e EPODE methodology is based on four main pillars:
1. 
A strong political will, thanks to the involvement of political representatives
2. 
A coordinated organization and approach based on social marketing methods
3. 
A multilevel, multistakeholder approach, involving public and private partners
4. 
Sound scientifi c background, evaluation, and dissemination of the program9
Th ese pillars are used to inform the execution of EPODE and give it sustainability and 
conformity.
One of the defi ning characteristics of the EPODE methodology in France is its focus on food 
and eating as sensory and social experiences. Children are taught to experience foods using the 
fi ve senses and to share all food experiences as a group. Activities around taste, fl avor, and texture 
are the program’s most important components, along with hands-on workshops around the coun-
try’s culinary traditions. EPODE coordinators are in charge of developing activities for children 
around the EPODE social marketing themes decided upon by the national coordination.
Importantly the EPODE program exists within the French cultural context of what is known 
as the so-called French Food Model, here taken to mean the structured food and eating events 
that take place throughout the day. We recognized that EPODE reinforces the education already 
provided in the school, family, and the community. Th ese environments have been shown to 
stimulate children’s curiosity and an appreciation for the pleasure, which can be associated to 
food and which is vital to the French culture and tradition.35 Th is early childhood discovery and 
appreciation for food continues throughout adulthood and is believed to be the precursor to 
general preferences among the French for natural, quality foods and social eating experiences.36
We noted very uniform recounts of habits based on rules and structure, the importance of 
tradition, pleasure, taste, food quality, and conviviality. French respondents explained clearly 
that organized meals were the standard eating practice and were essential to family relationships, 
well-being, and daily life in general—whether at school, at home, or in community contexts in 
general. Even though the French oft en take for granted the specifi city of their own cultural prac-
tices in comparison with other cultures, respondents described them very easily and with great 
detail, demonstrating that the structures are well defi ned and widely respected and were notice-
able within our population group.
Th e themes identifi ed by our analysis are consistent with research conducted by the Research 
Centre for the Study and Observation of Life Conditions in France37 and other research which has 
studied and defi ned the French Food Model and which has provided information on the popu-
lation’s compliance with it.6,37–42 Participants explained their habits easily, highlighting the struc-
tures in place for reinforcement and control: public policy in schools, media, industry, healthcare, 
and so on.
As part of the work that has defi ned the French Food Model, Mathé and colleagues at the 
Centre for Research and Observation of Consumption (CREDOC), France, conducted nation-
wide research to identify the current norms of the French around food. Th e fi ndings concluded 
that the model is a very structured one, controlled and maintained by family, schools, and public 


===PAGE 149===
124 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
policy (government regulation of advertising, school canteens, etc.).37 EPODE is a good example 
of how schools and public policy contribute to the maintenance of the model that is introduced 
fi rst within families.
Perceived EPODE Outcomes
Parents, school staff , and EPODE coordinators were asked to discuss the outcomes of the program 
for their family, school, and community. Most parents and teachers describe EPODE by its actions 
(presentations, fruit tasting, etc.) rather than as a broader community program. Th us, when they 
were asked to discuss their perception of the program’s impact, they primarily spoke about the 
impact of these activities rather than of the program as a whole. School staff  members were able to 
off er most information about EPODE’s impact as they are closely involved in the implementation 
of the program and are more aware about it than the parents. Only EPODE coordinators spoke 
about the impact of EPODE on the community in general.
Parents and school staff  generally praised the EPODE program for its contribution to chil-
dren’s food education. Th e program was most oft en referred to as a complement to the education 
off ered at school and within the home. As one respondent noted,
By doing [the EPODE program] in a group, they [children] saw the others and their reactions, 
and so it was a little more coherent with what we said at home. Because they don’t really have 
the desire to listen to what the parents say. . . . So I think that it reinforced the things that were 
said at the house. It reinforced what was done. Especially for my daughter. She heard the mes-
sages and she manages to put them into action. (Françoise, nurse, mother of two)
Teachers and teacher assistants also perceive EPODE to impact children’s taste preferences and 
food choices. A respondent said:
Well, when we started the fruit tasting, we had the impression that it was more of a con-
straint. We obliged [the children] and they had to taste and it wasn’t always a positive expe-
rience. Now it’s true that they beg us for them. Th ey’re happy when it’s the fruit period! [. 
. .] I think that it has had a very positive eff ect on the families. . . . Th e program has had a 
positive impact on their health as well because I assume that, if they ask for fruits at school, 
that they must ask at home too. (Olivia, teacher)
A teacher assistant explains her perception of EPODE and the impact on children’s habits at the 
canteen:
Well, I think that it is super good, it’s super! Yes, I have seen that the children eat more fruit 
since this activity started. For example, the watermelon, before they didn’t know what it 
was but now, well, when there is some at the canteen they jump all over it! (Anne-Sophie, 
teacher assistant)
At another school, teachers spoke about EPODE’s impact on children’s preference for fruit:
I fi nd that we, in terms of the children, we can see an evolution among the children in their 
responses. When there aren’t any fruits – when we’re not in the EPODE period of fruits, they’re 
like ‘wooow, there aren’t any fruits?’. Th ey ask for them back. (Danielle, school director)
Interviewee responses also reveal that school staff  noticed the impact of EPODE on families and 
parents’ eff orts to send children with healthy aft er-school snacks and picnics. A teacher assistant 
illustrates this fi nding:


===PAGE 150===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
125
We especially see their picnics when we go on outings. When we go out we see what they bring 
and yesterday we had a picnic. . . . And there were some children who had little carrot sticks or 
cherry tomatoes and others had cucumber sticks. We really see an evolution concerning the 
picnics. Th e parents make a real eff ort. (Clémence, teacher assistant, canteen and classroom)
A teacher expressed the same opinion:
It’s true that, in comparison with other schools that I have known that didn’t work with 
EPODE, we do see that the parents and the children are much more careful about the qual-
ity of the snacks. You wouldn’t see children coming with a packet of cookies, with chips or 
other . . . here Coca and Orangina, etc. are forbidden in any case. (Marc, teacher)
Participant responses show that the EPODE program has made an impact on school’s food and 
physical activity policies. Several teachers mentioned school policies around food, implemented 
with the help of EPODE:
We forbid the cans. We encourage them as much as possible to drink water or, when we 
have breakfast, when we have a snack here we ask them to bring fresh products . . . a fresh 
orange juice or, at least, without adding sugar. (Marc, teacher)
A school director explained the impact that the EPODE program has had on school food policies:
Before there was a snack in the morning and now there’s no snack before 16h30. At 16h30, 
on the other hand, they can have the snack that they want. Th ere are no restrictions, aside 
from candies that are forbidden and the sweet drinks. Only water is authorized. (Danielle, 
school director)
A teacher from the same school explained that the program has changed the school culture: “I 
would say that the values of EPODE have really penetrated into the school culture. It works well.” 
(Danielle, school director)
In summary, participants in France were able to talk positively about the eff ects of EPODE 
on children’s eating preferences and attitudes to eating in a more structured way and preferring 
high-quality snacks. EPODE also allowed for the introduction into schools of policies that lim-
ited the availability of what were perceived to be unhealthy food products, such as soft  drink and 
energy-dense nutrient poor snacks.
OPAL
OPAL in Australia
Methodology
Th e EPODE European Network (now called the EPODE International Network) allowed and 
supported the development of the program in other contexts provided that it be adapted and 
supported locally. In Australia, the federal government announced the National Partnership 
Agreement on Preventive Health in 2008. Th e program “aims to address the rising prevalence 
of lifestyle related chronic disease by laying the foundations for healthy behaviors in the daily 
lives of Australians through settings such as communities, early childhood education and care 
environments, schools and workplaces, supported by national social marketing campaigns.”43 It 
was under this scheme that the OPAL program was partially funded by the federal government 
starting in 2009. Furthermore, South Australian state and South Australian local governments 
partnered to fully fund the program and support its operations on all levels, avoiding the sourc-
ing of any private funds (in contrast to the EPODE methodology). Th e EPODE international 


===PAGE 151===
126 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
coordination team was contracted to provide support in the adaptation and implementation of 
the OPAL program over the next 4 years.
Th e South Australian Health Department placed a priority on developing the OPAL program 
in 2009, emphasizing that it would target “all levels of the environment and community including 
micro, meso and macro systems.”30,44,45
However, while the EPODE methodologies were adapted in South Australia, diff erences 
between the Australian and French versions of EPODE were acknowledged.45 Th ese diff erences 
were, fi rst, that the OPAL program was diff erent from EPODE in that it was implemented on a 
much wider scale, with 20 South Australian councils having commenced the program (including 
nearly one quarter of the population). Each community had 5 years and the equivalent of $1 mil-
lion invested to positively infl uence the social norms around physical activity and healthy eating.45 
Th e political commitment to OPAL, according to Jones and Williams, was also shown through the 
intervention period being set to 5 years and not 3 as per the usual policy cycle.
Second, the social marketing approach of OPAL made the program unique in comparison with 
other community-based programs in Australia. It uses a thematic approach, meaning that a cen-
tral coordination unit decides and develops communication for all OPAL communities around 
simple key messages (e.g., “Th ink feet fi rst”). Jones and Williams45 state that the themes are 
developed upon the most relevant available evidence, although there remain challenges around 
sourcing adequate evidence for specifi c intervention activities and applying the evidence to local 
settings, each with their own specifi c priorities and issues.
Th ird, as promoted by WHO, this program targets childhood obesity not only by improving 
knowledge and skills but also by reducing the eff ects of environmental contributions to the issue.47 
According to Jones and Williams, OPAL diff erentiates itself through its seven strategy areas, 
which use these two ways among others. Th e following are the seven strategy areas. Importantly, 
unlike the prescribed EPODE methodology, there is no mention of partnerships including public 
and private parties:
1. 
Coordination and partnerships—to increase connectedness between programs and 
organizations in order to improve access and effi  ciency
2. 
Social marketing—to use social marketing strategies to positively change social norms
3. 
Policy, planning, and legislation—to positively infl uence relevant policy, planning, and 
legislation
4. 
Infrastructure and environment—to develop and maintain supportive environments
5. 
Targeted community programs and services—to support and develop targeted 
programs
6. 
Taskforce development—to increase the skills and knowledge of those working in 
OPAL communities
7. 
Research and evaluation—to contribute to the knowledge base and the eff ectiveness of 
community-based obesity prevention programs45
Finally, OPAL distinguishes itself from EPODE through its fi rm commitment to forming a solid 
evidence base and evaluation program. Th is commitment arguably responds to gaps in the lit-
erature around community-based obesity prevention program evaluation.46 Indeed, Daniel and 
McDermott raise the question of how France’s EPODE functioned to produce positive outcomes 
on childhood obesity.48 When considering the international dissemination of the program, these 
authors express their concerns about the Fleurbaix–Laventie study that preceded the development 


===PAGE 152===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
127
of the EPODE methodology.48 Similarly, Swinburn et al. highlight the need for more signifi cant 
priority to be placed on appropriate designs and rigorous evaluations for obesity prevention pro-
grams.49 It has been claimed that OPAL’s evaluation program is designed to take into account 
these concerns through the implementation of a quasi-experimental research design with group 
matched data. It uses mixed methods (both quantitative and qualitative) and includes process, 
impact, and outcome measures.45
OBSERVED OPAL OUTCOMES
Evaluation data shows that, aft er 4 years in action, the OPAL program has developed and sustained 
eff ective community engagement around the program themes and messages. OPAL has been present 
in all departments of South Australian local government and major community organizations in 
order to change the mind-sets of the infl uencers and impact their commitment to driving sustainable 
changes in the community. Community stakeholders are well aware of the program’s aim and are 
very invested in contributing. Evaluation data suggests that this is where the real impact of OPAL lies.
An OPAL coordinator expressed her perception of OPAL’s impact on these structural relation-
ships and the necessary foundations for sustainable change:
I think we’ve done some really good things and hopefully they’ll last, but it’s only the sur-
face. I mean I feel like we’ve just scratched the surface. We’ve got really good networks in 
schools; we have relationships with people that are really on solid foundations, so there is 
nothing that we couldn’t set out to do now that we couldn’t achieve because the foundations 
that have been created are really rock solid. (Denise, OPAL Coordinator)
Denise discussed an activity of OPAL that illustrates the usefulness of these local partnerships:
If I choose [the most successful] project it would have to be Plant Your Own Fresh Snack 
and that’s because we’ve been able to develop a relationship with Housing SA, and of course 
Housing SA house the most disadvantaged group. (Denise)
Denise goes on to say:
I mean Plant Your Own Fresh Snack has really been successful because – and it’s not about 
the fruit and the vegetables and the garden box and the seedlings, it’s actually about the 
mentor and it’s also about the extended circle of infl uence around that tenant. So there’s 
the mentor, there’s OPAL, there’s Housing SA, there’s Skills for All regional development, 
Into Work, AC Care, Lifeline. All of these people sort of come in and out of their lives and 
suddenly they’re being stimulated to do other things and it’s human connection. (Denise)
Furthermore, the OPAL program has successfully infl uenced school and community envi-
ronments in order to promote healthier habits. OPAL coordinators mentioned environmental 
changes made within the community thanks to the OPAL program:
Well obviously there’s a lot of water fountains have been installed so community will be 
able to use them. Assistance with playgrounds and that obviously children and parents 
use them. Outdoor gym equipment, that’s utilised by the public as well. Free city bike hire 
which OPAL supported with the City of Mt Gambier and tourists and locals use the bikes. 
Bike lanes have been put in place so it’s a lot safer for people to ride bikes on the road. 
(Jenny, OPAL coordinator)
Evaluation data gives very weak evidence to suggest, however, that the OPAL program had seri-
ous, lasting impacts on children’s weight or health status. Evaluation data does suggest that a great 


===PAGE 153===
128 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
deal of families were made aware of the OPAL messages and that they were encouraged to make 
changes in their lives in order to follow the advice: “I do know a little bit about [OPAL]. I think it’s 
awesome. I’ve seen the signs, like the electronic signs and a few things like that” (Nancy, mother 
of three).
Most parents also said that their children speak to them about OPAL activities:
Th ere was a breakfast the other morning, pop, peel and pour [. . .]. And something was 
on at the council too and I know we’ve also had something at work, some little brochures 
that have come through – water is nature’s soft  drink, something like that. (Melinda, dental 
nurse, mother of two)
Rachel, like other parents, said that her child recites OPAL’s social marketing messages: “Yeah 
every morning my youngest will be just like ‘peel, pour, pop’. Yeah it’s on the fridge” (Rachel, 
mother of two).
Another parent explained that the OPAL increased her family’s awareness around nutrition:
Yeah they do the pyramids at home all the time. Every single OPAL thing that they’ve 
brought home is on our fridge or on a wall somewhere. . . . Yeah, a massive impact for the 
kids to actually notice diff erent things in the pyramid of ‘okay, this is good but this is better.’ 
(Linda, mother of four)
An OPAL coordinator supported this fi nding:
If you look at the individual factors around knowledge, motivation skills, attitudes, then 
we’ve defi nitely impacted on those. We’ve seen changes again through our surveys, our 
telephone based surveys, where parents are describing changes in behaviour and changes in 
knowledge and understanding so we know there have been those changes. (Michael)
Some parents, like John, explained that OPAL’s impact on families is limited due to the diffi  culties 
of relying on children to pass messages on to families and parents:
Our kids see us eat and they follow us. I don’t know how successful it would be for kids in 
reception year one to learn about it at school and then go home and try and infl uence the 
family diet because the parents. . . . (John, father of four)
Some respondents explained that OPAL’s impact on families is limited due to low socioeconomic 
status:
I think there’s a genuine desire to think about their health and wellbeing and their changes. 
It’s certainly driven by socio-economic circumstances. Th e more means you have, the more 
likely you are to be in a much healthier lifestyle. Th e less means you have, the less likely you 
are to be living a healthy lifestyle. (Glenn, OPAL coordinator)
Although OPAL also makes eff orts to infl uence school environments and provide educational 
activities to children and school staff , the lack of control over the school environment and 
children’s habits has limited OPAL’s ability to challenge fundamental issues such as policy and 
informing parents and children about health. OPAL can improve infrastructures to encourage 
physical activity; it can provide school gardens and healthy fruits and vegetables to children 
although it cannot infl uence the rules (or lack thereof) that govern children’s school mealtimes, 
frequency, or the composition of their lunch boxes. School directors also mentioned that it was 
diffi  cult to ensure behavior change due to diff erences in socioeconomic status and restrictions 
to food:


===PAGE 154===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
129
It is, it’s hard, and a lot of our parents are very low socio-economic and oft en the dearer food 
is the healthy food so they opt for the cheaper stuff , but if we can keep just giving them ideas 
at school it helps I think. (Caroline, school director)
Given that the OPAL program centered its eff orts primarily on the community stakeholder relation-
ships, which are at the foundation of sustainable community changes, the impact of the program 
on schools was less evident for children, parents, and school staff . Some school directors showed a 
willingness to commit to improving the school environment in terms of children’s food and lifestyle 
habits, although there were serious limits of OPAL’s impact on school environments as Australian 
governments and the Department of Education have practically no control over children’s food hab-
its during their time at school. An OPAL coordinator specifi cally suggested that OPAL help lobby 
for governments to provide children with lunch meals daily and a pleasant dining experience:
It would be great to have the policies change within all schools so that children sit down and 
have a lunch all together and it’s provided by the school and it’s only healthy options, that 
parents don’t actually provide the food, it’s all incorporated into school fees and that there’s 
no junk available. (Jenny, OPAL coordinator)
Similarly, another OPAL coordinator suggested the same:
I would do those big picture policy changes in the education department and so, yeah, I’d 
extend school hours for children so that it suits a working mother but also if lunches are 
provided, you know, that’s a huge shift  I think. (Melissa, OPAL coordinator)
Finally, we acknowledge that the OPAL brand is known by general community members, although 
its impact on their habits is not clear today. Th e data allowed us to understand that OPAL’s greatest 
actions lie in its cross-governmental approach of creating relationships and encouraging commu-
nity capacity building through bringing together diff erent community actors around the same cause. 
Th ese eff orts contribute to the building of a foundation within which sustainable actions will be 
grounded and, later, sustainable behavior changes can be stimulated on individual and family levels.
Consequences of Differences Observed Between EPODE and OPAL
Our fi ndings demonstrated that EPODE and OPAL programs diff ered in terms of aims and objec-
tives, the implementation of the four pillars of the EPODE methodology, and also in terms of 
their outcomes for families, communities, and schools.
Generally speaking, our fi ndings provide evidence to suggest that the EPODE program is 
characterized by it being complementary to the education provided in the home, reinforcing the 
French Food Model. Th e OPAL program, on the other hand, seems to be characterized by its 
widespread social marketing community presence and its focus on the factors that have been 
identifi ed to specifi cally contribute to obesity in Australia: namely, nutrition and physical activity. 
In summary, France’s EPODE was a program that was designed to reinforce key messages 
based on existing principles founded in culture and tradition. Th e principles promoted by the 
program are widely communicated and known by the French population—adults and children—
through the National Nutrition and Health Program and others. EPODE in France therefore acts 
as a support in promoting the same messages that are fi rst promoted within the home and second 
through the widespread government program. Th e PNNS provides guidelines and nutritional 
recommendations adapted to the culture where the EPODE program off ers hands-on experiences 
for children to live them and fi nd a link with what they observe and learn at home. Th e EPODE 
program, therefore, uses a food appreciation approach to equip children, through fun activities, 


===PAGE 155===
130 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
with the practical experiences they need to learn and develop healthier preferences (e.g., cooking, 
gardening, experimenting with taste).
Australia’s OPAL plays a diff erent role in preventing childhood obesity. Th e key fi ndings 
highlighted earlier show that the OPAL program has implemented the four pillars of the 
EPODE methodology although, given the contextual diff erences around food and lifestyle 
habits, the program looks very diff erent and promotes diff erent messages. In contrast to the 
EPODE program, the OPAL program promotes habits outside current Australian behavioral 
norms. France’s EPODE, on the other hand, reinforces messages already communicated by 
family tradition and a general public health campaign. Our observations showed that OPAL has 
the role of creating new dynamics within the community, building capacity among local actors, 
facilitating the organization of communication campaigns, and adapting all interventions to 
local needs.
We want to argue that our research suggests that there are cultural and contextual diff erences 
between France and Australia, and that these become the conditions for the successful transfer of 
the EPODE methodology. We would also suggest that in transferring ideas from one culture to 
another, full attention must be paid to context and content. Even something as common as health 
and illness has a cultural context, and assumptions and generalities cannot be made without care-
ful evaluation of the cultural diff erences.50
Case Study Questions
1. 
What are the features of the most eff ective public health nutrition programs addressing 
childhood obesity?
2. 
What are the most appropriate and eff ective ways of bringing experience gained in one 
culture into a diff erent cultural environment?
3. 
What steps need to be taken to ensure fi delity of a program developed in one jurisdic-
tion and applied to another of a diff erent culture?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
Go to this website and follow the links to the story about “cow sharing” as a 
means of accessing raw (unpasteurized) milk: https://www.faganfamilyfarm.com/
what-is-a-dairy-herd-share-program.
 
Th e story raised a number of issues concerning food cultures (visible as “belief sys-
tems”) within an Australian community: one that supports access to raw milk and the 
other that regulates raw milk for public health reasons. Make a list of the “for” and 
“against” statement: “People should be able to have access to raw milk for their own 
and their family’s consumption.”
2. 
Go to this website from EPODE: epodeinternationalnetwork.com/events.
 
Click on the video that looks at the views of a variety of individuals on public–private 
partnerships (PPPs) to tackle nutrition-related problems. Divide the responses into for 
PPPs and against PPPs. Sum up the main arguments of each. Discuss these summary 
responses in light of the following statement: “Public–private partnerships, where 
resources from the private sector are used by the public sectors for public good, are the 
best solution to current nutrition-related problems.”


===PAGE 156===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
131
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What are the most eff ective ways of understanding cultural diff erences and consequent 
infl uences on food choice?
2. 
When transferring a program developed in one culture into another culture, what are 
the best ways of ensuring respect for the host and the home culture?
3. 
Why would qualitative research approaches be more appropriate methods for under-
standing culture than surveys and questionnaire-based research?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
For a number of resources on food and culture, follow this link to a website on food and culture: https://
www.faganfamilyfarm.com/what-is-a-dairy-herd-share-program.
Th is website contains a number of current and future projects relevant to food and culture: https://www
.foodculturehealth.com.
For more information about OPAL (Australia), go to this website: https://www.sahealth.sa.gov.au/wps/wcm/
connect/public+content/sa+health+internet/healthy+living/healthy+communities/local+community/
opal/opal.
GLOSSARY
Ecological systems theory: Can be defi ned as a framework in which community psychologists 
examine individuals’ relationships within communities and also the wider society.
EPODE (Ensemble, Prevenons l’Obesite Des Enfants): An obesity prevention program de-
veloped in France, now franchised into many jurisdictions.
Foodways: Th e visible habits and patterns that confer particular food attributes to groups of 
people.
Health Star Rating systems: Health Star Rating systems are common in many jurisdictions. In 
Australia and New Zealand, Health Star Ratings provide a front-of-pack label that summarizes 
the nutritional quality of the food; see healthstarrating.gov.au/internet/healthstarrating/pub-
lishing.nsf/Content/About-health-stars.
L.E.A.D.: Is defi ned as Locate the evidence, Evaluate the evidence, Assemble the evidence, and 
inform Decisions. A model for the prevention of childhood obesity.
Les Halles: Indoor food hall, where individual stalls and counters sell a variety of food and 
produce, which is common throughout France. 
OPAL (Obesity Prevention and Lifestyle): An obesity prevention program introduced into 
South Australia, based on the French EPODE model.
Social-Ecological Model (SEM): Th e SEM is a theory-based framework for understanding 
the multifaceted and interactive eff ects of personal and environmental factors that determine 
behaviors and for identifying behavioral and organizational leverage points and intermediaries 
for health promotion within organizations. Th ere are fi ve nested, hierarchical levels of the SEM: 
individual, interpersonal, community, organizational, and policy/enabling environment.
Social foods: How some foods convey social status or lack thereof.
Soft  food culture: Describes the ways in which some cultures have strong and traditional roots 
that endure despite waves of social change (hard food cultures). On the other hand, soft  food cul-
tures—not having strong roots or traditions—are more easily changed through trends and fashion.


===PAGE 157===
132 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
REFERENCES
1. Helman C. Culture, Health and Illness. London: Butterworths; 1990.
2. Neth J, Henderson J, Coveney J, et al. Consumer faith: a qualitative exploration of religion and trust in 
food. Food, Cul Soc. 2013;16(3):421–436. doi:10.2752/175174413x13673466711840
3. Douglas M, Nicod M. Taking the biscuit: the structure of British meals. New Soc. 1974;30:744–747.
4. Coveney J. A qualitative study of socio-economic diff erences in parental lay knowledge of food and 
health: implications for public health nutrition. Public Health Nutr. 2005;8(3):290–297. doi:10.1079/
phn2004682
5. Triandis H, Brislin R. Cross-cultural psychology. Am Psychol. 1984;39(9):11.
6. Fischler C, Masson E. Français, Européens et Américains face à l’alimentation. Paris: Odile Jacob; 2008.
7. Sekaran U. Methodological and theoretical issues and advancements in cross-cultural research. J Int Bus 
Stud. 1983;14(2):13.
8. Leung K, Bond MH. On the empirical identifi cation of dimensions for cross-cultural comparisons. 
J Cross Cult Psychol. 1989;20(2):133-151.
9. Borys J, Le Bodo Y, De Henauw S, et al. Preventing Childhood Obesity: EPODE European Network 
Recommendations. Cachan, France: Lavoisier; 2011.
10. Hancock T. Th e evolution, impact and signifi cance of the healthy cities/healthy communities movement. 
J Public Health Policy. 1993;14(1):5–18.
11. Berenson GS. Health consequences of obesity. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012;58(1):117–121. doi:10.1002/
pbc.23373
12. Dehghan M, Akhtar-Danesh N, Merchant AT. Childhood obesity, prevalence and prevention. Nutr J. 
2005;4(1):24. doi:10.1186/1475-2891-4-24
13. Downey AM, Frank GC, Webber LS, et al. Implementation of “Heart Smart:” a cardiovascular school 
health promotion program. J Sch Health. 1987;57(3):7. doi:10.1111/j.1746-1561.1987.tb05378.x
14. Glenny A-M, O’Meara S, Melville A, et al. Th e treatment and prevention of obesity: a systematic review 
of the litterature. Int J Obes. 1997;21:23. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0800495
15. Hayman LL, Williams CL, Daniels SR, et al. Cardiovascular health promotion in the schools: a 
statement for health and education professionals and child health advocates from the committee on 
Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in Youth (AHOY) of the council on cardiovascular disease 
in the young, American Heart Association. Circulation. 2004;110(15):2266–2275. doi:10.1161/01.
cir.0000141117.85384.64
16. Ells LJ, Campbell K, Lidstone J, et al. Prevention of childhood obesity. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2005;19(3):14. doi:10.1016/j.beem.2005.04.008
17. Swinburn B, Egger G. Preventive strategies against weight gain and obesity. Obes Rev. 2002;3:289–301. 
doi:10.1046/j.1467-789x.2002.00082.x
18. World Obesity Federation. Childhood Obesity. World Obesity; 2015. Retrieved from https://www
.worldobesity.org/about/about-obesity/prevalence-of-obesity
19. Simons-Morton B, Greene WH, Gottlieb NH. Introduction to Health Education and Health Promotion. 
2nd ed. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press; 1995:510.
20. Kumanyika S, Parker L, Leslie J. Bridging the Evidence Gap in Obesity Prevention: A Framework to Inform 
Decision Making. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2010.
21. Swinburn B, Egger G, Raza F. Dissecting obesogenic environments: the development and application 
of a framework for identifying and prioritizing environmental interventions for obesity. Prev Med. 
1999;29:563–570. doi:10.1006/pmed.1999.0585
22. World Health Organization. Interventions on Diet and Physical Activity: What Works. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2009.
23. Kumanyika SK, Gary TL, Lancaster KJ, et al. Achieving healthy weight in African-American communities: 
research perspectives and priorities. Obes Res. 2005;13(12):2037–2047. doi:10.1038/oby.2005.251
24. Raine KD. Determinants of healthy eating in Canada: an overview and synthesis. Can J Public Health. 
2005;96(suppl 3):S8–S15. doi:10.1007/BF03405195
25. Rose N, Miller P. Political power beyond the state: problematics of government. Br J Sociol. 1992;43(2):33.
26. Kumanyika S, Jeff ery R, Morabia A, et al. Obesity prevention: the case for action. Int J Obes. 2002;26:425–
436. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0801938


===PAGE 158===
 
6. Food and Culture Importance in Public Health Nutrition 
133
27. Davison KK, Birch LL. Childhood overweight: a contextual model and recommendations for future 
research. Obes Rev. 2001;2(3):13. doi:10.1046/j.1467-789x.2001.00036.x
28. Booth SL, Sallis JF, Ritenbaugh C, et al. Environmental and societal factors aff ect food choice 
and physical activity: rationale, infl uences, and leverage points. Nutr Rev. 2001;59(3):S21–S39. 
doi:10.1111/j.1753-4887.2001.tb06983.x
29. Simon C, Wagner A, Platat C, et al. ICAPS: a multilevel program to improve physical activity in 
adolescents. Diabetes Metab. 2006;32:41–49. doi:10.1016/s1262-3636(07)70245-8
30. Egger G, Swinburn B. An “ecological” approach to the obesity pandemic. Br Med J. 1997;315:477–483. 
doi:10.1136/bmj.315.7106.477
31. Mayer K. Childhood obesity prevention: focusing on the community food environment. Fam 
Community Health. 2009;32(3):14. doi:10.1097/FCH.0b013e3181ab3c2e
32. Wilson A. Community-based obesity prevention initiatives in aboriginal communities: the experience 
of the eat well be active community programs in South Australia. Health. 2012;04(12):1500–1508.
33. Pettman T, McAllister M, Verity F, et al. Eat Well Be Active Community Programs Final Report. Adelaide, 
Australia: Department of Health; 2010:248.
34. Backett-Milburn K, Wills W, Roberts M-L, Lawton J. Food and family practices: teenagers, eating and 
domestic life in diff ering socio-economic circumstances. Child Geogr. 2010;8(3):303–314. doi:10.1080/
14733285.2010.494882
35. Czernichow S, Martin A. Nutrition et Restauration Scolaire, de la Maternelle au Lycée: Etat des Lieux. 
Paris, France: Agence Française de Sécurité Sanitaire des Aliments; 2000.
36. Tessier S, Chauliac M, Descamps Latscha B. Éducation nutritionnelle à l’école: évaluation d’une méthode 
pédagogique «La Main à la Pâte». Santé Publique. 2010(2):229–238. doi:10.3917/spub.102.0229
37. Mathé T, Tavoularis G, Pilorin T. La Gastronomie s’Inscrit dans la Continuité du Modèle Alimentaire 
Fançais. Paris, France: Centre de Recherche pour l’Étude et l’Observation des Conditions de Vie; 2009.
38. Drewnowski A, Henderson SA, Shore A, et al. Diet quality and dietary diversity in France: implications 
for the French Paradox. J Am Diet Assoc. 1996;96(7):663–669. doi:10.1016/s0002-8223(96)00185-x
39. Dupuy M, Godeau E, Vignes C, Ahluwalia N. Socio-demographic and lifestyle factors associated with 
overweight in a representative sample of 11-15 year olds in France: results from the WHO-Collaborative 
Health Behaviour in School-aged Children (HBSC) cross-sectional study. BMC Public Health. 
2011;11:442. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-11-442
40. Escalon H, Bossard C, Beck F. Baromètre Santé Nutrition 2008. Saint-Denis, France: Institut National de 
Prévention et d’Education pour la Santé; 2009.
41. Rozin P, Kabnick K, Pete E, et al. Th e ecology of eating: smaller portion sizes explain the French Paradox. 
Psychol Sci. 2003;14(5):5. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.02452
42. Tavoularis G, Mathé T. Le modè le alimentaire franç ais contribue à limiter le risque d’obé site. Consomm 
Modes Vie. 2010;232:4.
43. Council of Australian Government. National Partnership Agreement on Preventive Health. Adelaide, 
South Australia: Australian Department of Health; 2013.
44. Economos CD, Irish-Hauser S. Community interventions: a brief overview and their application to the 
obesity epidemic. J Law Med Ethics. 2007;35:131–137. doi:10.1111/j.1748-720x.2007.00117.x
45. Jones M, Williams M. OPAL. Public Health Bull. 2010;7(3):15–19.
46. Healey BJ, Zimmerman RS. Th e New World of Health Promotion: New Programme Development, 
Implementation and Evaluation. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett; 2010.
47. World Health Organization. Obesity: Preventing and Managing the Global Epidemic. Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization; 2000.
48. Daniel M, McDermott R. Obesity prevention in France: yes, but how and why? Public Health Nutr. 
2009;12(8):2.
49. Swinburn B, Bell C, King L, et al. Obesity prevention programs demand high-quality evaluations. Aust 
N Z J Public Health. 2007;31(4):305–307. doi:10.1111/j.1753-6405.2007.00075.x
50. Guillemin I, Marrel A, Arnould B, et al. How French subjects describe well-being from food and 
eating habits? Development, item reduction and scoring defi nition of the Well-Being related to Food 
Questionnaire (Well-BFQ©). Appetite. 2016;96:333–346. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2015.09.021
51. Reynolds B, Hitchcock N, Coveney J. A longitudinal study of Vietnamese children born in Australia: 
Infant feeding, growth in infancy and aft er fi ve years. Nutrition Research. 1989;8:593.


===PAGE 160===
7
PROMOTING NUTRITIONAL 
HEALTH, HEALTHY FOOD 
SYSTEMS, AND WELL-BEING 
OF THE COMMUNITY
ADAM HEGE, ALISHA FARRIS, AMY DAILEY, AND MARIA JULIAN
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the key concepts involved with nutritional health at a local level.
2. Understand the processes involved with developing a community food system.
3. Explain the barriers, disparities, and inequities commonly found in local communities.
4. Evaluate a community food system for inequities and future opportunities.
5. Apply a systems framework to promoting nutritional health and community wellness.
INTRODUCTION
Food and the manners by which it is produced and distributed across a community have pro-
found implications for the livability and quality of life off ered. In addition, health outcomes and 
economic viability are subsequently long-term outcomes of the food system that is created and 
maintained in a community. Th ere is no doubt that community leaders and public health practi-
tioners face a daunting task in seeking to meet the immediate needs of their citizens, while also 
having a forward vision for meeting future challenges. In this chapter, we seek to describe some 
of the key issues that are involved with food and nutritional health at the community level. Along 
the way, topics such as food security, food justice, community development, and systems thinking 
are detailed.
CONNECTION TO NATIONAL INITIATIVES (NATIONAL TO LOCAL)
Eff ectively promoting health at the community level requires an alignment of public health ini-
tiatives at all levels—national, state, and local. As discussed in previous chapters, national health 
initiatives are selected based on continuous nutrition monitoring and surveillance, and govern-
ment organizations and health professionals should align their policies and programs to address 
those initiatives.
While the government bears a large responsibility for the public health promotion of national 
initiatives, local government, nongovernmental, and nonprofi t organizations are vital for 


===PAGE 161===
136 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
implementation at the community level. Eff ective and organized community eff orts to promote 
health and healthy food systems and ensure the well-being of a community must involve all sec-
tors of the community, including providers of healthcare services, local businesses, community 
organizations, the media, and the general public.
Federal Nutrition Programs Advance National Health Initiatives
As discussed previously, federal programs such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
Food and Nutrition Service’s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) help make healthy 
foods more accessible to limited-resource individuals and families.1 While these programs are 
important in all areas of the United States, rural areas have higher rates of participation due to 
increased poverty levels.2
Connecting limited-resource individuals to national nutrition assistance programs that can 
alleviate hunger and infl uence diet and physical activity is impactful for promoting national 
health initiatives. Th is is an important and good fi rst step in ensuring healthy communities. In 
addition to SNAP and WIC, nutrition programs available for rural children and older adults, 
which can be utilized by the public health practitioner, include the following.
Children:
 
■
School Breakfast Program: www.fns.usda.gov/sbp/school-breakfast-program
 
■
National School Lunch Program: www.fns.usda.gov/nslp
 
■
Special Milk Program: www.fns.usda.gov/smp/special-milk-program
 
■
Child and Adult Care Food Program: Aft erschool Program: www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/
child-and-adult-care-food-program
 
■
Summer Food Service Program: www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/
summer-food-service-program
Older adults:
 
■
Nutrition Services: https://www.nutrition.gov/topics/food-assistance-programs/
nutrition-programs-seniors
 
■
Meals on Wheels: www.mealsonwheelsamerica.org
 
■
Child and Adult Care Food Program: www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/
child-and-adult-care-food-program
 
■
Senior’s Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program: www.fns.usda.gov/sfmnp/
senior-farmers-market-nutrition-program
Th ese programs are discussed in more detail in further chapters. However, it is important to 
discover where they exist and are off ered in the local community so that information on accessing 
them can be disseminated.
Connecting National Initiatives to the Community
National health initiatives provide public health practitioners and community leaders with a road 
map for current and prevalent health issues in the United States. Public health practitioners are 
responsible for being aware of current national health initiatives and fi nding creative opportuni-
ties to implement initiatives on a community level. Most activities that public health practitioners 


===PAGE 162===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
137
engage in to infl uence behavior change include communication, education, and/or policy, sys-
tems, and environment strategies.3
Communicating National Initiatives at the Local Level
Health communication includes verbal and written strategies to infl uence and empower individ-
uals, populations, and communities to make healthier choices. Public health practitioners can 
communicate national initiatives on a community level by tailoring national communication 
messages to their respective populations. For example, many health professionals utilize the Core 
Nutrition Messages developed by the USDA, Food and Nutrition Service, to communicate the key 
recommendations of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans to limited-resource audiences.4 Th e 
Core Nutrition Messages are evidence-based messages, developed through extensive focus group 
discussions and survey research, and were developed and designed to resonate with limited-re-
source mothers and children. Some examples centered around child feeding include “Enjoy each 
other while enjoying family meals” and “Let them learn by serving themselves.”
Th ese types of national resources assist local community agencies in delivering consistent 
communication across the nation to a specifi c audience. Health professionals can choose which 
messages would resonate most with their respective populations and utilize the messages through 
verbal and written communication channels such as social media campaigns, billboards, newspa-
per articles and newsletters, television broadcasts, radio commercials, public service announce-
ments, handouts, videos, digital and/or social media tools, health fairs, nutrition programs, and 
other media outlets.
When utilizing, adapting, or developing eff ective health communication strategies, several 
things should be considered by the public health practitioner:
 
■
Are the messages evidence-based and appropriate to use in this community?
 
■
What are the available and most eff ective channels of communication to reach the 
intended audience in this community?
 
■
What cultural considerations, health literacy capacity, and social norms of the intended 
audience in this community should be considered?
 
■
Does this communication strategy align with the goals and objectives of my employ-
ment organization?
Last, using multiple communication and media strategies will ensure a broader reach to your 
intended community audience. Consider how your organization might focus eff orts to commu-
nicate only one or two messages across a broad range of channels.
Education of National Initiatives at the Local Level
Providing educational programming is one strategy for promoting health in a community. Public 
health practitioners should align the focus of educational programs and outreach with national 
health initiatives. Health education programs are tailored for their intended audience and can 
incorporate health communication messages through classes, seminars, webinars, workshops, 
and online modules.
Public health practitioners can conduct research to create evidence-based programs tailored 
for their intended audience, or they can utilize programs that are readily available, target national 
health initiatives, and can be tailored to an intended community audience. Th e SNAP-Ed program 
and Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP) are federally funded programs 


===PAGE 163===
138 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
that develop and provide evidence-based health education programming and evaluation.5 Th ese 
programs oft en provide access to programming through various channels. One such channel 
is the SNAP-Ed Strategies & Interventions Toolkit: An Obesity Prevention Toolkit for States, 
which was developed by USDA’s Food and Nutrition Service, Th e Association of SNAP Nutrition 
Education Administrators (ASNNA), and the National Collaborative on Childhood Obesity 
Research (NCCOR), a partnership between the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the 
National Institutes of Health, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the USDA.6 Th is online 
resource has many health intervention educational programs, all focused on national health ini-
tiatives such as healthy eating, overweight/obesity, and physical activity. For example, if your 
intended audience is children and your health initiative is childhood obesity, using the site you 
can locate the Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH) program, an evidence-based 
program developed by the University of Texas School of Public Health, designed to prevent child-
hood obesity in school-age children.7
Other examples of national level resources that can be utilized to educate individuals at 
the community level include MyPlate, food labeling educational resources (USDA), and other 
educational tools from Team Nutrition (USDA), an educational resource library created by 
the USDA.8–10 For example, MyPlate, the educational and visual representation of the Dietary 
Guidelines for Americans, can be used in a variety of settings from educating children in schools 
or adults in health education courses on eating well-balanced and appropriately portioned 
meals. Th ese same institutions can make use of the food labeling guides and resources to teach 
individuals about reading food labels for dietary information, nutrition knowledge, and increas-
ing self-effi  cacy when shopping for foods at the grocery store. Public health practitioners may 
also partner with other community organizations and businesses to provide or refer patients to 
cooking classes, meal programs, and other nutrition-related services and education. As with all 
educational resources, information should always be tailored to the intended community audi-
ence. For example, including culturally appropriate foods as part of MyPlate and food labeling 
demonstrations would be important to consider.
Policy, Systems, and Environmental (PSE) Changes at the Local Level 
That Support National Initiatives
For communication and educational strategies to be successful, policies, systems, and environ-
ments must also support and encourage healthy behaviors. PSE change strategies are designed to 
promote healthy behaviors by making healthy choices readily available and easily accessible in the 
community. Tackling the national health initiatives locally will require community-based eff orts 
to increase the availability of healthy foods in local supermarkets, farmers’ markets, corner and 
convenience stores, changes in national agricultural policy to encourage the availability of locally 
nutritious foods at reasonable costs, and regulation of food industry advertising to promote ethi-
cal marketing standards. Eff orts to motivate individuals to be more active must be combined with 
strategies that create physical and social environments more conducive to physical activity. Some 
examples of community-based activities that would promote health through PSE changes and 
advance national initiatives locally include:
 
■
Healthy vending. Establishing healthy food options in vending machines in public 
places (toolkit available from the Seattle and King County Public Health Department: 
www.kingcounty.gov/depts/health/nutrition/~/media/depts/health/nutrition/
documents/healthy-vending-toolkit.ashx).


===PAGE 164===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
139
 
■
Farmers’ markets. Increase access to fresh and local produce while boosting the 
income of local farmers (toolkit available from the University of Minnesota Extension: 
extension.umn.edu/local-foods/power-produce-pop-club).
 
■
Healthy retail. Partnering with local businesses to promote healthy food items or advo-
cating for a state or regional tax on unhealthy food items (toolkit available from the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-lo-
cal-programs/pdf/Healthier-Food-Retail-guide-full.pdf).
 
■
Green space. Increasing the number of parks, greenways, and trails in the community 
and/or making them more accessible (toolkit available from the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/healthtopics/parks_trails_work-
book.htm).
 
■
School nutrition. Strengthening school wellness polices or working in schools to 
promote healthy food items (toolkits available from the USDA: www.fns.usda.gov/
get-involved/toolkits).
 
■
Farm-to-cafeteria initiatives. Working with local farmers to sell fresh produce directly 
to schools or worksites (toolkit available from the USDA: https://www.fns.usda.gov/
cfs/farm-school-resources-1).
 
■
Food environment. Increasing the availability of fresh, healthy foods in 
schools, restaurants, and other places where food is purchased (toolkit avail-
able from ChangeLab Solutions: www.changelabsolutions.org/publications/
healthy-menus).
 
■
Community-supported agriculture. Establishing or promoting partnerships between 
farmers and consumers to purchase weekly produce (toolkit available from the 
University of Connecticut Extension: www.ctfarmrisk.uconn.edu/documents/CSA-
Guide.pdf).
 
■
Creating social marketing campaigns to infl uence awareness and behavior change 
(toolkit available from the Community Tool Box, University of Kansas: www
.ctfarmrisk.uconn.edu/documents/CSA-Guide.pdf).
Examples of PSE Change Interventions
 
■
In North Carolina, the North Carolina Division of Public Health and Extension at 
North Carolina State University implements PSE changes through the Faithful Families 
Eating Smart and Moving More program. Th e program includes direct education 
curriculum on healthy eating and physical activity, training of community leaders, 
and environmental and policy changes chosen by the faith community such as healthy 
meeting policies and encouraging physical activity (Faithful Families Eating Smart and 
Moving More, faithfulfamilies.com).
 
■
Healthy Kindergarten Initiative from Th e Food Trust is a direct education and PSE 
change intervention that integrates food choices with access. Families are connected to 
local, healthy foods through mobile farm markets or low-cost, community-supported 
agriculture; children are exposed to locally grown, healthy snacks at school; parents 
are involved through workshops or newsletters; and nutrition and physical activity 
education is integrated into the curriculum (Th e kindergarten initiative: A healthy start 
to a healthy life, thefoodtrust.org/uploads/media_items/the-kindergarten-initiative.
original.pdf).


===PAGE 165===
140 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
 
■
Blue Zones Project in rural Minnesota is a community-wide health initiative that 
implements PSE changes to increase healthy choices. Activities include the promotion 
of healthy foods at restaurants and schools, implementation of worksite health clin-
ics, policies on tobacco use in public places, and increased walking/biking trails (Blue 
Zones Project: Albert Lea, MN, 2016, albertlea.bluezonesproject.com).
PSE strategies can have the greatest impact on the promotion of a healthy community because 
they target multiple levels of behavior infl uence. However, public health practitioners should be 
prepared to rely on other sectors of the community for successful planning and implementation, 
be considerate of the time required to implement changes, and develop a comprehensive plan to 
evaluate the eff ectiveness and impact of PSE changes on their communities.
Important Considerations
Public health practitioners cannot tackle every national health initiative. Understanding local 
needs, community resources, culture/social norms, and local values will assist in determining 
which health initiatives are a priority. Th e following can assist in deciding where to focus your 
communication, education, and PSE strategies.
Explore the local root causes of healthy or unhealthy behaviors. Consider the social deter-
minants of health (e.g., socioeconomic status, housing, transportation)11 that lead to reaching a 
person’s full health capacity. Determine if there are strategies that could be implemented to eff ect 
change at the root level.
 
■
Assess local needs and resources. Consider what is feasible and which organizations 
could help implement changes for the greatest needs.
 
■
Include the intended audience if at all possible. Eff orts to ensure that everyone has 
input in strategies that promote health can impact program eff ectiveness and increase 
community empowerment.
 
■
Work together. Consider and listen to what community members and stakeholders 
think are important issues. Collaborating with the community increases the ability of 
any program to eff ect change.
PROMOTION OF NUTRITIONAL HEALTH, FOOD SYSTEMS, 
AND COMMUNITY WELL-BEING THROUGH ADVOCACY 
AND COMMUNITY FOOD SECURITY ACROSS LIFE STAGES
Food Systems
Every food we consume has a complex history behind it. Before a food reaches our plate, it 
leaves its farmland or waterway origin and passes through the hands of producers, processors, 
transporters, storage operators, retailers, consumers, and handlers of waste. Th e term food 
system refers to all aspects of producing, buying, selling, eating, and disposing of food.12 Th is 
includes production, processing and aggregation, distribution, marketing, consumption, and 
food waste recovery. A local food system encompasses a network of all of these components but 
is specifi c to a place. It can encompass a county, region, or an entire state. Every food system 
is based on the relationships among the people and resources involved at each point in the 
process.
A strong local food system can spur positive economic development and build community 
wealth.13 It can protect water and soil quality and preserve agricultural land and waterways. By 


===PAGE 166===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
141
sustaining the viability of farm and fi shery operations, a local food system can enhance the quality 
of life for both food producers and consumers.
Th e food system is extremely complex. Producers, consumers, processors, distributors, and 
retailers interact with people working in virtually every sector that exists in a community, from 
education to social services. As our food supply chains have become more globalized, the food 
system has become even more complex. Consumers now have more choices and greater access 
to food. Globalization of the food system has also created new opportunities and challenges for 
farmers, manufacturers, distributors, and policy-makers.14
Systems Thinking: The Natural World and Its Impact on Food
Improving a food system requires systems thinking, which is the ability to understand the way 
diff erent things infl uence each other in a system. When we change one part of a food system—
such as introducing pesticides to reduce the spread of insect-borne diseases—this change is likely 
to impact the other parts of the system. While use of pesticides can prevent disease and increase 
profi ts for farmers, it has led to problems such as pesticide resistance and harmful eff ects on 
humans and wildlife.15,16 It is important to recognize the complex relationships that exist in any 
food system in order to avoid causing negative externalities to our health and the environment. 
Th e food system can also impact widespread issues such as chronic illness, infectious disease, 
social inequality, climate change, and environmental degradation.
The Growing Role of Food Systems
Nationwide, more aspects of a community are now focusing on the food system. Businesses, non-
profi ts, universities, healthcare professionals, and policy-makers are recognizing the dynamic 
relationships that exist in the local food system among food access, health, income, economic 
development, and geography. Nontraditional partners—such as city planners and health insur-
ance companies—are teaming up with traditional food stakeholders to impact the food system in 
new ways. Both private and public agencies are supporting the development of local food systems 
because of the positive economic and public health outcomes that can be achieved by building 
the infrastructure of a local food system. Consumers are also looking for a closer connection to 
their food producers. As a result, many local food systems have increased access to sustainable, 
organic farming.
Built Environment
A community’s built environment—or human-made surroundings—has a strong eff ect on what 
and how people eat.17 Th e type and location of food stores in a community, for example, are oft en 
associated with the diets of residents and their health.18 People who live in areas with limited 
access, oft en referred to as “food deserts” or “food swamps,” to healthy food tend to have poorer 
diets and suff er more from obesity and diabetes.19,20 Food deserts generally refer to communities 
or neighborhoods where there is limited availability or access to healthy foods, whereas food 
swamps are where there is an abundance of fast, highly processed, and unhealthy food options 
available.21
Disparities in Food Access
Many diff erences in access to or availability of food, or health disparities, persist today. Healthy 
People 2020 defi nes a health disparity as “a particular type of health diff erence that is closely 


===PAGE 167===
142 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
linked with social, economic, and/or environmental disadvantage.”22 Health disparities “adversely 
aff ect groups of people who have systematically experienced greater obstacles to health based on 
their racial or ethnic group; religion; socioeconomic status; gender; age; mental health; cogni-
tive, sensory, or physical disability; sexual orientation or gender identity; geographic location; 
or other characteristics historically linked to discrimination or exclusion.”22 Many public health 
practitioners now advocate for the use of the term health inequities, which applies a justice 
and equity component to the very defi nition, rather than just highlighting diff erences. Health 
equity is the principle of pursuing elimination of health disparities because they are unjust. Th e 
term draws specifi c attention to the underlying social conditions that lead to higher health risks 
and poorer health outcomes for populations that are economically, socially, or environmentally 
disadvantaged.23
Disparities in access to healthy foods have aff ected low-income communities in both urban and 
rural areas.24 Low-income and underserved communities oft en have fewer supermarkets and less 
access to stores that sell high-quality fruits and vegetables.25 Rural communities oft en have a higher 
number of convenience stores, where healthy foods are less available than in larger, retail food mar-
kets.26 African American and Hispanic neighborhoods are also more likely to be located in “food 
deserts,” where fresh fruits, vegetables, and other healthful foods are not easily accessible.25 Th is can 
oft en lead to higher prices, less variety, and lower quality of healthy foods for many neighborhoods.
Measuring health disparities by social stratifi cation can be challenging. Factors such as edu-
cation levels and household income are oft en used as indicators of social class, but they do not 
tell the whole story. In the United States, geographic areas, such as census tracts, zip codes, and 
counties, are oft en used to illustrate disparities by social strata. Th is kind of data can also help one 
visualize community-level food justice issues in ways that examining individual-level disparities 
does not. Th e map provided in Figure 7.1 visually displays food access disparities in the United 
States by county, representing the number of people in a county living more than 1 mile from a 
supermarket or large grocery store in an urban area or more than 10 miles in a rural area. Notice 
that this measure of food insecurity takes into account both the rural and urban contexts. In 
urban areas, there may be small corner stores within walking distance, but these stores do not 
usually carry much high-quality fresh produce. In rural areas, fi nding transportation to the near-
est grocery store can be impossible.
Community leaders and public health practitioners are increasingly working to strengthen 
the local food system and combat food insecurity. One such strategy, the Healthy Corner Store 
Initiative, brings high-quality fruits, vegetables, and healthful foods into corner stores in lower 
income communities. Transportation improvements can also make it easier for low-income fam-
ilies, aging adults, and individuals with mobility challenges to access more sources of aff ordable, 
healthy food.27
Community Food Security
Social, economic, and/or environmental disadvantage is oft en linked to material disadvantages, 
particularly as it relates to food access. For example, families may not have enough material 
resources in the form of money to buy enough nutritious food for the entire family, or families 
may live in isolated areas without good grocery stores or transportation to those stores.
Easy access to fresh and aff ordable food is critical to positive health outcomes. Food security 
is defi ned by the United Nations Committee on World Food Security as the condition in which 
all people, at all times, have physical, social, and economic access to suffi  cient, safe, and nutritious 
food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.


===PAGE 168===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
143
FIGURE 7.1 Food access disparities in the United States by county.
Source: From U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. Food Environment Atlas. https://www.ers.
usda.gov/data-products/food-environment-atlas
0 - 2,500
Population, low access to store, 2015
2,501 - 5,000
5,001 - 50,000
> 50,000
280 mi
140
70
0
No data
GA
GA
AL
AL
TN
TN
KY
KY
WV
WV
VA
VA
NC
NC
SC
SC
FL
FL
DE
DE
MD
MD
PA
PA
MI
MI
MI
MI
OH
OH
IN
IN
IL
IL
IA
IA
MO
MO
MN
MN
ND
ND
SD
SD
NE
NE
MT
MT
WY
WY
ID
ID
WA
WA
OR
OR
NV
NV
UT
UT
CO
CO
NM
NM
AZ
AZ
CA
CA
OK
OK
AR
AR
LA
LA
KS
KS
TX
TX
WI
WI
NY
NY
CT
CTRI
RI
MA
MA
NH
NH
VT
VT
ME
ME
MS
MS
GA
AL
TN
KY
WV
VA
NC
SC
FL
DE
NJ
NJ
MD
PA
MI
MI
OH
IN
IL
IA
MO
MN
ND
SD
NE
MT
WY
ID
WA
OR
NV
UT
CO
NM
AZ
CA
OK
AR
LA
KS
TX
WI
NY
CTRI
MA
NH
VT
ME
MS
NJ
Th e concept of food security began with the global food crisis of the mid-1970s, and the term 
has broadened over time to encompass more than combating hunger. Food security, as well as 
the role of nutrition within it, has been recognized as a major global concern since the mid-
1990s.28 Th e complex challenge of food security persists in many countries worldwide, including 
the United States. In 2016, an estimated one in eight Americans were food-insecure.29 Food inse-
curity exists when people do not have adequate physical, social, or economic access to food. Food 
insecurity is a major social determinant of health.30,31 Many American households have experi-
enced chronic hunger and poverty for generations. Food insecurity has been associated with poor 
behavioral, emotional, and academic health outcomes for children.32
With over a billion people in the world living on less than $1.25 per day, malnourishment 
remains a signifi cant global problem. Th is is not just a problem for low-income countries. In 
the United States, over 15 million households are considered food-insecure and the number of 
census tracts considered low-income and low-access has increased in the past decade.29 Many 
households that do not qualify for government food assistance, because they make just above 
federal income requirements for SNAP, for example, or perhaps are undocumented individuals, 
are unable to meet the food needs of their families.
In the United States, food insecurity is not only unequally distributed by geographic areas but 
is also unequally distributed by race/ethnicity and nativity. A 2017 study of over 32,000 people, 
using many waves of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, showed that aft er 


===PAGE 169===
144 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
taking into account socioeconomic status, the signifi cant food security divide between Whites 
and African Americans and Mexican Americans continues to be perpetuated.33 Th is pattern held 
true for immigrants and U.S.-born individuals. Th is racial/ethnic inequity in food security is 
likely also related to geographic distributions of grocery stores. Racial/ethnic residential segrega-
tion remains highly prevalent in the United States, and this segregation is also associated with the 
limited access to grocery stores, as shown earlier.
Food insecurity is closely associated with disparities in health outcomes and other social 
justice issues. Food insecurity exacerbates susceptibility to diseases, mitigates the ability to fi ght 
diseases, and then contributes to the cycle of poverty by making it diffi  cult for sick individu-
als to attend school and work. Food insecurity signifi cantly contributes to infectious diseases, 
chronic conditions, and mental health issues. Access to cheap, highly caloric food, or food 
swamps, is a well-known contributor to the global obesity epidemic and related chronic con-
ditions, such as diabetes, and is common in low-resource communities. Obesity and diabetes 
are both conditions that are strongly correlated with social gradients, with people of lower 
socioeconomic status at much higher risk. Individuals, particularly children, experiencing food 
insecurity and malnourishment can have diffi  culty in fi ghting off  infectious and/or parasitic 
diseases. Harsh medications, such as complex antibiotic or antiretroviral regimens, can be dif-
fi cult for malnourished bodies to tolerate, which then can lead to further susceptibility to other 
infectious diseases and can lead to problems with drug resistance. Mental health outcomes are 
also associated with food insecurity. A 2017 study showed that food insecurity was associated 
with poorer mental health outcomes across all global regions, even aft er taking into account 
other socioeconomic factors.34
The Future of Food Security
Many factors will continue to impact food security, such as the growing global population, rising 
food prices, and changing climate. By 2050, the demand for food is expected to be 60% greater 
than it is today.35 Achieving food security and improved nutrition is one of the Sustainable 
Development Goals that the United Nations has set for the year 2030.
Access to aff ordable and healthy food should be included in the development of community 
health improvements. In addition to public health practitioners, food policy councils, local gov-
ernment offi  cials, food retailers, and city planners are among the many stakeholders who can help 
ensure access to aff ordable and healthy food.
Food Sovereignty
As the food system becomes more complex and global food prices increase, the global movement 
for food sovereignty has challenged corporate food regimes and called for more equitable rights 
and participation in the food system.36 Food sovereignty is the right for all people to choose 
healthy and culturally appropriate food that is produced through ecologically sound and sus-
tainable methods. Food sovereignty focuses on the needs of those who produce, distribute, and 
consume food, rather than the demands of markets and corporations. Th e international peas-
ant coalition, La Vía Campesina, introduced the concept of food sovereignty at the World Food 
Summit in 1996 to address ongoing global struggles over the control of food, land, water, and 
food producers. Th is movement calls for reviving small-scale farming as a public resource for 
food security and nutrition, while doing away with the monopoly of power from transnational 
corporations. Th e movement also calls for the democratization of community and regional food 
systems.37


===PAGE 170===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
145
Th e seven pillars of food sovereignty include the following:38
 
■
Focuses on food for people: People have the right to food that is healthy and culturally 
appropriate. Food is not simply another commodity to be traded or speculated on for 
profi t.
 
■
Values food producers: Food sovereignty asserts the right of food producers to live and 
work in dignity, including women, who are the majority of food producers worldwide.
 
■
Localizes food systems: Food must be seen primarily as sustenance for the community 
and only secondarily as something to be traded.
 
■
Puts control locally: Food sovereignty places control over territory, land, grazing, 
water, seeds, and livestock and fi sh populations under local communities instead of 
outside corporate interests.
 
■
Builds knowledge and skills: Food sovereignty approaches support the development 
of agricultural knowledge that is already being used, supplemented with new skills 
and appropriate technologies, rather than introducing costly new technology that can 
contribute to land loss for small farmers.
 
■
Works with nature: Food sovereignty requires production and distribution systems 
that protect natural resources and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
While the concepts of food security and food sovereignty both address global hunger and envi-
ronmental degradation, food sovereignty is rooted in broad class and race struggles. It calls for 
respecting the rights of farmers and indigenous communities to make their own decisions around 
their food system. Food movements such as food security, food justice, and food sovereignty 
serve a critical role in applying social pressure for system change.
FOOD AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
Social justice generally refers to the fair and equal treatment of people. Food justice refers to 
food-related social justice matters and has been defi ned as “the struggle against racism, exploita-
tion, and oppression taking place within the food system that addresses inequality’s root causes 
both within and beyond the food chain.”39 Th ese systemic matters have consequences at all levels 
of the Social-Ecological Model (SEM), including individual, interpersonal, institutional, com-
munity, and societal levels resulting in signifi cant health disparities or health inequities.
Many systems factors at local, state, national, and global levels contribute to the food justice 
issues that communities face. At the local level, even communities that have large agriculture 
economic sectors can suff er from lack of adequate access to healthy food. Growers can oft en get 
paid better prices to sell their products to large retailers or to higher end markets in wealthy urban 
areas, resulting in fresh food that is grown in localities, but exported elsewhere. Furthermore, 
state and national food policies can drive local growing patterns, prices, and access.
OPTIMIZING AVAILABLE RESOURCES: COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
AND RESOURCE OPTIMIZATION
Critical to a socially just and eff ective community food system that reduces the risks for food inse-
curity and poor nutritional health opportunities are the elements of community engagement and 
community development. Community engagement refers to the process and actions of involving 
community members in decision-making that impacts the day-to-day quality of life off ered in 


===PAGE 171===
146 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
the community; furthermore, community engagement has consistently been shown to be a very 
eff ective strategy for engaging with and empowering vulnerable populations and reducing health 
inequities.40–42 Oft en linked with community engagement as the goal outcome is an improved 
community development. Community development builds upon the engagement process and is 
focused on an improvement in outcomes, such as the physical environment, cultural norms, social 
and political actions, and enhanced educational and economic opportunities, to name a few.43,44 
Th e combination of the two can have sustainable positive outcomes. In the following section, we 
provide insight to the process, detail opportunities and challenges that can arise, and provide 
examples, as evidenced in the academic literature and the fi eld of public health nutrition practice.
Community Engagement and Community Development in Public Health 
Nutrition Practice
As a practitioner in the fi eld of public health nutrition, prior to embarking on a community 
engagement process for improved community nutrition, it is vital to understand the context (cul-
ture, demographics, etc.) and history of the community as this will assist in identifying key stake-
holders to inform the decision-making process. Stakeholders are described as “any individual or 
group living within the community or likely to be aff ected by decisions or actions.”45 Whether it 
be a rural or urban community, key stakeholders involved in the food system includes an assort-
ment of actors including agricultural workers/farmers, local government, nonprofi t agencies and 
businesses, citizens, and most importantly from a public health perspective, those oft en over-
looked and most vulnerable. With this understanding, many scholars advocate for a “bottom-up” 
approach in which citizens and farmers are given an increasingly larger voice in local food system 
decision-making—as opposed to the traditional top-down approach in which local leaders make 
all of the key decisions.46 Nonetheless, engaging a wide array of stakeholders is imperative to the 
process.
Next, an important factor to consider with the goal of community development is the approach 
that is taken; as public health practitioners, we desire to build a sense of trust with our constit-
uents and to come together over a common set of goals. We want to work with people, not on 
people! In doing so, over the past several decades, scholars from a variety of professional disci-
plines have shown that Asset-Based Community Development (ABCD) is a sound strategy for all 
contexts.47 An ABCD approach focuses on what a community already has that can be capitalized 
upon, its assets, rather than the traditional needs-based approach, which fi rst looks for what a 
community needs.48,49 For example, what is oft en found in communities is that numerous individ-
uals and groups are working to address food and nutrition issues (e.g., community gardens, food 
pantries), but they are doing so without the knowledge of each other's eff orts. Our job as public 
health practitioners is frequently to bring all of those groups together and to help community 
members to work together in a more strategic manner—to work smarter, not harder. However, 
what so oft en occurs is that we center our attention on the limitations that our communities have 
with statements like, “If only we had more money or funding” or “What we need is....” Strategies 
grounded in the ABCD approach, or worldview, allow us to overcome these types of statements 
and to celebrate accomplishments and build upon successes.
Community-Based Coalitions and Faith-Based Initiatives
One of the great opportunities aff orded through community engagement is the forming of 
coalitions. Coalitions are “groups of individuals and/or organizations with a common interest 
who agree to work together toward a common goal.”50 In eff ect, coalitions are “action oriented,” 


===PAGE 172===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
147
“analyzing the issue,” “identifying and implementing solutions,” and “creating social change”—
with the understanding that the best results occur when working collectively rather than indi-
vidually.51 When it comes to coalitions, there are three primary types: grassroots, professional, 
and community.51,52 Grassroots coalitions are those organized by community members and advo-
cates, professional coalitions are formed by professional associations (e.g., American Medical 
Association, American Nutrition Association, American Public Health Association), and com-
munity coalitions tend to blend the grassroots and professional stakeholders. For the most part, 
coalitions focused on nutrition at the local level are grassroots and community in spirit.
In keeping up with news and current events from around the world and in our communities, 
we all are familiar with grassroots initiatives rooted in coalitions. Grassroots movements are those 
that are organized by ordinary citizens to raise awareness about a cause(s) and to seek change. For 
example, on a national scale, here in the United States in recent years, we have seen the Tea Party 
and the Occupy Wall Street movements have success in building momentum for their respective 
causes. On a more local level, we witness communities everyday striving to improve food access 
and to improve nutritional health—all grounded in a grassroots mentality. Grassroots movements 
help to build excitement, and if done in a positive manner, can create a sense of community and 
lead to sustained change.
For local communities, one of the groups heavily involved in starting initiatives aimed at food 
justice and addressing food security and access needs are faith-based organizations. Faith-based 
initiatives, oft en underutilized and garnering little attention, are movements in which religious 
institutions such as churches or nonprofi t agencies, either formally or informally, spearhead 
eff orts and generally partner with public health agencies and the medical sector or an institution 
of higher education for community development and improved health.53,54 Th ese eff orts can range 
from activities in policy and advocacy to health education to health promotion programming. 
With faith being a focal point of the culture and spirituality being a driving force in their com-
munities, faith-based health promotion eff orts have had a great deal of success in both rural and 
minority populations.55–58
When such eff orts as grassroots and faith-based initiatives are coupled with professionals, such 
as health educators, registered dietitians, and other clinical and community health professionals, 
community coalitions are formed and the reach and ability to improve lives are increased expo-
nentially. In Boone, North Carolina, where the Appalachian State University is located and where 
three of the authors of this chapter live and work, the Hunger and Health Coalition began in much 
this way over 35 years ago and continues to positively impact the northwestern region of the state 
each and every day. Exhibit 7.1 provides a brief history and a description of services and programs 
that are off ered. Not only does a coalition such as the Health and Hunger Coalition provide much-
needed services and programs but it also helps to connect residents to volunteer opportunities 
and partner with Appalachian State to engage in service learning and internships for students. 
Th is helps to build a sense of community pride, cohesion, and a commitment to service that every 
community needs in order to function eff ectively.
Community coalitions can also further elucidate strategies to highlight local agricultural 
eff orts that can help to alleviate food security challenges. In Watauga County, North Carolina, 
some of the other initiatives that have sprung out of these and other eff orts include F.A.R.M. Café; 
Watauga County Farmers’ Market; Blue Ridge Women in Agriculture; and the High Country 
Food Hub. F.A.R.M. (which stands for Feed All Regardless of Means) Café is a local nonprofi t 
agency centered on providing daily meals using local food sources; above all, it helps to build 
a sense of community, and visitors are always impressed by the hospitality and diversity that 
is found. As a result, F.A.R.M. Café was featured in Our State Magazine (www.ourstate.com/


===PAGE 173===
148 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
at-boones-f-a-r-m-cafe-all-are-fed) as well as UNC TV (myhome.unctv.org/farm-cafe). Farmers’ 
markets are found in many communities and are great ways for getting citizens connected to the 
local agriculture sources and to provide a way for farmers to serve the community and make a lit-
tle money along the way. In recent years, farmers’ markets, like the one found in Watauga County 
(www.wataugacountyfarmersmarket.org), have begun to accept SNAP and Electronic Benefi ts 
Transfer (EBT) benefi ts and have further worked to assist WIC and Senior Nutrition eff orts. Blue 
Ridge Women in Agriculture (www.brwia.org) is a collaborative group of women farmers ded-
icated to improving the local food system to address health equity and hunger. In addition, the 
organization has a focus on educating consumers about farming and cooking practices to allow 
individuals to be more self-suffi  cient in their food practices. Last, in conjunction with the Watauga 
County Cooperative Extension offi  ces, Blue Ridge Women in Agriculture has helped to create a 
local food hub, the High Country Food Hub (foodhub.brwia.org), for people to order food from 
local farms for pickup and to create a system in which farmers can further have their agriculture 
distributed at local food banks. In the end, these types of eff orts help to bring people together, 
particularly when it comes to further advocacy eff orts aimed at funding and policy causes.
EXHIBIT 7.1 
THE HISTORY AND COMMUNITY IMPACT OF THE HUNGER AND HEALTH 
COALITION OF BOONE, NORTH CAROLINA
Hunger and Health Coalition
141 Health Center Drive, Suite C, Boone, NC 28607
https://www.hungerandhealthcoalition.com
History
Began in January of 1982 in a closet at Boone United Methodist Church.
Moved to a new and bigger location in 1989; at the same time, began to offer a 
free health clinic staffed by physicians from the local health department.
In 1995, staff recognized that community members facing food security chal-
lenges often had to decide between food and prescription medications. As a 
result, a free pharmacy program was instituted.
Now has grown to become a county-owned facility, providing both food and 
medical assistance to vulnerable populations in the area.
Services and 
programs/impact
Food Pantry (nearly 800,000 lbs of food to those in need in 2019)
Fresh Produce Market (over 2,000 households received fresh food in 2019)
Free Pharmacy (14,387 prescriptions at a value of $2,969,000 in 2019)
Food Recovery Kitchen (families can receive a sandwich/soup combination or 
to-go meal for each member of the family)
Helping Hands Wood Lot (brought fi rewood to 279 households in 2019)
Backpack program (7,800 meals distributed in 2019)
Simple Gesture (47,750 lbs of food donated to pantry in 2019)
Snacks for Scholars/Healthy Start (1,768 snack bags given out in 2019)
Sharing Tree (holiday gifts and meals to over 160 families and seniors in 2019)
Source: Data from Hunger and Health Coalition. https://www.hungerandhealthcoalition.com


===PAGE 174===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
149
Advocacy Efforts: Informed by Community Engagement and Supported 
by Coalitions
Th e process of community engagement and development along with the development of coalitions 
assists in moving advocacy eff orts forward. Advocacy at the community level consists of “actions” 
intended to infl uence public policy for a particular cause, or to strengthen capacity and mobilize 
resources, or to decrease barriers to health.59,60 Most public health advocacy strategies have been 
best informed by having a variety of perspectives involved and more voices to be heard—as the 
saying goes, “there is power in numbers.” In a recent systematic review, the importance of under-
standing and engaging in the public policy process at all levels was deemed essential for the future 
of public health nutrition.61 Needs for advocacy include (but are not limited to) more sustainable 
food production and practices aimed at protection of the environment;62 structural and systems 
changes frequently leading to food insecurity and poverty;63 unjust labor practices oft en used in 
agricultural production;64 and adequate funding and capacity of public health systems.65
SYSTEMS THINKING FOR EFFECTIVE PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION 
AT THE COMMUNITY LEVEL
Many of us drive around in the latest and trendiest automobiles; all right, maybe some of us are 
just happy to have a car, any car, to get us around town and to travel to our intended destination. 
How many times, however, do we really stop to think about how complex an automobile is and 
how many intricate pieces are fi t together to allow us to be able to get around so quickly? Or how 
about the organization that we work in, in which all of the staff  members are completing their 
respective roles to allow the agency to perform? Or yet another example, what about all of the 
anatomy and physiology that allows us as human beings to perform daily activities? Th ese three 
examples all have one thing in common: each is a system and when functioning at its highest 
ability, the system can be described as a “well-oiled machine.”
Well, the same can be said of public health and the focus on public health nutrition. For a 
community to have optimal health and well-being, it is imperative that all of the pieces func-
tion as a system. In recent years, while borrowing from numerous other professional disci-
plines, public health has advocated for and adopted a systems thinking model in the pursuit of 
improved population health.66–69 Systems thinking helps us to think about how the system is 
functioning collectively, rather than each individual or agency independently; with this there 
are new and innovative research strategies being utilized that are also leading to new forms of 
practice. Th is type of thinking and approach forces us to work in a collaborative and interdisci-
plinary way and to get out of our professional silos. In the following section, we delve into how 
this “thinking in systems” can help us to strengthen the fi eld of public health nutrition. We also 
provide examples from the fi eld and opportunities for how practitioners can make the most of 
this approach.
Systems Thinking for Public Health Nutrition
For the past several decades, the fi eld of public health along with health promotion interventions 
has been informed by an ecological, or more precisely a social-ecological, perspective to address 
community health challenges, including nutrition and obesity.70–72 Th is approach recognizes that 
health is infl uenced at multiple levels, driven by the combination of individual characteristics and 
social forces, oft en out of the control of the individual. Public health practitioners and researchers 
have had successes along the way, but what has oft en lacked is the integration of multiple levels 


===PAGE 175===
150 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
into interventions. For example, nutrition education and cooking courses have been conducted 
with the best intentions, without foreseeing that when the participants have completed the course, 
they are going right back out into the environment that was present before—a food environment 
or social conditions that might not support an improved dietary intake. On the other hand, poli-
cies such as requiring restaurants to provide the caloric intake have been instituted, without pro-
viding supporting education to assist individuals in changing their nutritional habits. Th e point is 
that the system has not been integrative in nature.73
When we begin to think about the food system in this more integrative way, we recognize that 
it is a complex makeup of both natural and human-made systems, which can include such aspects 
as weather/climate, biology, transportation, the economy, and healthcare resources available.74 
Th ere is no single cause for the system “breaking down,” but it is more of the feedback loops that 
occur through all of the pieces at work. In addition, it makes us recognize that the “blaming the 
victim” mentality oft en found around food and other health issues, whether it be hunger and/or 
obesity, is lacking and uninformed. A systems approach in our thinking allows us to address and 
confront these preconceived, and oft en unconscious, biases that we as humans have toward the 
challenges that so many people face. Most important, systems thinking helps us to strengthen our 
public health and nutrition education eff orts (see Box 7.1).
Maximizing Nutrition Education Through the Public Health, Interprofessional 
and Interdisciplinary Team
As public health practitioners focused on improving nutritional health, we have two main foci: 
making sure people have access to enough food (food security/hunger) and empowering people 
to use food and nutrition to maintain and improve their health. Up to this point, we have focused 
(for good reason) mainly on the former. However, it is also critically important to use an interpro-
fessional and interdisciplinary approach to target nutrition education.
To maximize nutrition education for children in a community, many sectors of the community 
should be involved. Teachers, parents, and school administrators can invest in local community 
gardens, while school nutritionists can additionally provide education and learning opportunities 
for growing and eating healthy foods. Th e children (and parents) who attend those schools can 
be seen at the local health department or local pediatrics offi  ce and receive nutrition education 
from child health professionals. Grocery stores and farmers’ markets can ensure availability of 
healthy options and off er incentives to purchase healthy food items, while community health 
educators can supply education and resources for shopping and preparing healthy meals at home. 
Restaurant owners can add healthy food choices to their menu items, and academic professionals 
can evaluate such activities to determine impact and eff ectiveness. All sectors working together 
will undoubtedly have a much larger impact on nudging toward healthy behaviors than just one 
sector working alone.
Marketing Programs in Communities: The Role of Communication 
and Health Literacy
One of the great challenges in public health is getting people to participate, and retaining them, in 
events and programs targeting improved health. Th ere is not a much worse feeling than planning 
and developing an intervention—and then few, or none, are interested or actually able to partic-
ipate. Th erefore, it is critical to spend the proper time and attention toward how the program or 
intervention will be marketed and communicated to the public.


===PAGE 176===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
151
BOX 7.1
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD: FORMING THE ACFPC
The story of the ACFPC (www.adamsfoodpolicy.org) in Adams County, Pennsylvania, began in 2007 in a 
basement of an old school, where a community initiative, called Support Circles (see www.supportcircles
.org/circles-model) met weekly to inspire and equip families and communities to end poverty. Low wage 
earners seeking to escape poverty, referred to as Support Circles Leaders, met to assess ﬁ nancial, emo-
tional, and social resources; explore systemic barriers to escaping poverty; and connect with community 
allies who offered support through networking, listening, and guidance. As months went by, Support 
Circles Leaders made progress with new jobs and new living arrangements and some experienced new 
obstacles and setbacks. Cara, a single mom with two kids, was making fast progress—from a waitress 
making $10 an hour to a bank teller, making $16 an hour. One evening she said, “I am proud that I no lon-
ger receive SNAP beneﬁ ts, but all we now eat is cereal.” At over $15 an hour, Cara lost all SNAP beneﬁ ts 
and would not break even again until she earned $20 an hour. Cara’s experiences highlight a signiﬁ cant 
gap in self-sufﬁ ciency when beneﬁ ts decrease with increased, but inadequate, wages. Watch this video 
that explains Cara’s situation: https://www.adamsfoodpolicy.org/why-food-policy.
When all other expenses are ﬁ xed (e.g., housing, childcare, transportation), food is considered a 
ﬂ exible expense. As Cara, and other Support Circles Leaders, started to share their stories around 
town, people began to listen. Community-based food access initiatives started to independently take 
shape, including food recovery programs, famers’ markets that accept SNAP beneﬁ ts, community-sup-
ported agriculture, and community gardens. Connecting people at the head of these initiatives with 
major players in the food system became a new goal. The formal establishment of the ACFPC in 2008 
brought together social service agencies, higher education, institutions, farmers, businesses, local 
government, and community members with a vision that all residents of Adams County, Pennsylvania, 
will have access to a safe, nutritious, affordable, and adequate food supply within a sustainable system 
that promotes the local economy. Focusing on a common community agenda has facilitated inde-
pendent organizational shifts toward mutually reinforcing goals, inﬂ uenced local policy changes, and 
promoted program development, particularly with respect to access to local fruits and vegetables for 
low-income families.
While each member organization independently prioritizes healthy food access within their own 
institutions, working toward the common community goal, the ACFPC also initiates collaborative pro-
grams. For example, since 2011, the ACFPC has administered Healthy Options, a food voucher pro-
gram, which now serves 120 families and 60 seniors. Participants receive monthly vouchers to use at 
local farmers’ markets and locally owned grocery stores. Many of the participants have now become 
Community Leaders, and have assumed administrative and social networking roles with the program. 
Results from a community-based participatory research and evaluation analysis showed that, in addi-
tion to increased access to healthy food, participation in the program also offers opportunities for 
social interaction and cross-cultural exchange. Healthy Options, largely funded by local donations, 
also supports local growers and the local economy, helping to realize the ACFPC vision of having a 
sustainable local food system.
ACFPC, Adams County Food Policy Council; SNAP, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
Source: From Dailey AB, Hess A, Horton C, et al. Healthy options: a community-based program to address food 
insecurity. J Prev Interv Community. 2015;43(2):83–94. doi:10.1080/10852352.2015.973248


===PAGE 177===
152 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Th e most widely utilized communication strategy in public health is diff usion of innovations. 
Th e Diff usion of Innovation Th eory generally postulates that social change, or in this case involve-
ment with a program, happens when communication occurs through a set of steps, including 
knowledge, persuasion, decision, implementation, and confi rmation.75 Additionally, this perspec-
tive recognizes that people fall into fi ve categories in terms of how quickly they adopt an innova-
tion or program: innovator, early adopter, early majority, late majority, and laggard.76 With this 
thinking and framework, we as public health practitioners can formulate how best to reach our 
audiences, based on context and the populations targeted.
Connected to our ability to communicate and market community-level interventions and 
programs, two other important concepts to embed in our strategies include health literacy and 
cultural competency. Health literacy focuses on the general population’s ability to access, com-
prehend, and utilize health information or services.77 We have numerous citizens across our coun-
try with very low health literacy levels, and it is now a foundational principle for Healthy People 
2030.78 Cultural competency refers to one’s ability to respect and value cultural diff erences and 
to one who strives to work eff ectively to address disparities that exist largely because of cultural 
diff erences—developing culturally competent public health professionals is vital to the pursuit of 
health equity.79
Collaborative Grantsmanship in Public Health Nutrition
It is widely recognized that most public health programming and interventions require adequate 
funding. Th erefore, most public health professionals will be involved in developing grant pro-
posals to obtain funding for their work—in fact, many employees are paid out of these grants. As 
such, to be competitive in funding pursuits, it is vital for public health nutritionists to use systems 
thinking and to seek out partnerships and collaborations for grant opportunities. When grant 
proposals are developed with multiple perspectives and expertise involved, much stronger pro-
posals are submitted—and much better work is performed as a result. Fortunately, some funders 
have begun to support initiatives that prioritize systems change addressing health equity and food 
sovereignty from multiple perspectives of diverse stakeholders. For example, the W.K. Kellogg 
Foundation funded a 9-year Food and Fitness initiative focused on systems changes to address 
childhood obesity and health inequities. Two of the key takeaways from this process include rec-
ognizing the importance of deep engagement with people who bring diverse perspectives and 
lived experience and that sustainable systems change focused on equity requires community lead-
ership and ownership.80 As a result, many agencies that provide grant funding are now requiring 
that interdisciplinary collaborations are involved and that systems change is valued for improved 
health.
CONCLUSION
As discussed in this chapter, “it takes a village” to provide accessible and adequate nutrition to a 
community. Health equity and social justice are guiding principles of public health, and therefore, 
most of our public health nutrition eff orts at the community level are centered on food justice and 
reducing food insecurity. To do so, it is paramount that we be the leaders in shaping food systems 
that allow this to occur. Th is includes engaging in the community, identifying key stakeholders, 
developing and maintaining partnerships, and using systems thinking to drive our work. Along 
the way, practitioners must practice cultural competency and continually develop and refi ne their 
communication skill sets. Th ankfully, there are numerous models from the national level all the 


===PAGE 178===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
153
way down to the local level that can help to inform or improve our work. It is up to students, 
practitioners, and all of those involved in work at the community level to work side by side with 
members of the community and to never stop learning from each other—aft er all, community 
nutrition and health is a process that never stops!
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Public health, including nutrition, seeks to address root causes of poor health, social 
inequities, and health disparities at multiple levels.
2. 
Nutrition and food systems at the local community level are vastly infl uenced and 
aff ected by global and national level policies, programs, and events.
3. 
Food security and nutritional health should be at the forefront of overall community 
development initiatives.
4. 
It is vital that public health nutrition practitioners engage in the community and lead 
advocacy eff orts aimed at PSE change.
5. 
Th e work of nutritional health at the local level is complex and requires a systematic, 
multidisciplinary, and evidence-based approach.
CASE STUDY: COMMUNITY FORUMS AND WORKING 
GROUPS: THE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PROJECT 
OF MCDOWELL COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA
Th e Community Engagement Project of McDowell County, North Carolina, is a public health 
intervention that holds frequent forums to hear directly from residents in order to better under-
stand assets, needs, and challenges of the community with a focus on health equity. Th e pro-
gram began in 2016 in West Marion, one of the rural towns in McDowell county, and it has now 
expanded as a joint project between the McDowell Health Coalition and McDowell Technical 
Community College to the rest of the county.
Over 70% of McDowell county is designated as rural Appalachia with high rates of poverty. 
In West Marion, where the project began, median household incomes are well below the county 
and national levels, with higher income disparities for African Americans and Latinos–Hispanics. 
Most residents have generational ties to the community.
Goals of the initial forum included:
 
■
Engage an expert facilitator with skills and knowledge related to rural people and 
places.
 
■
Create a local planning team to plan the forums and encourage the community to 
attend.
 
■
Launch the fi rst forum to identify priority issues and develop a vision for the future.
Goals of future forums and sustainability included:
 
■
Host one-on-one outreach meetings between formal and informal leaders in the 
community.
 
■
Invite resource partners to speak at the forum to share information and answer ques-
tions related to the community’s issue areas.


===PAGE 179===
154 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
 
■
Create issue-based work groups, with goals, activities, and deadlines for future work.
 
■
Support emerging leaders with coaching and training opportunities.
 
■
Identify and hire a local coordinator to support the long-term sustainability of the 
forums.
 
■
Apply for a grant to support local projects and activities.
Th rough the forums in West Marion, fi ve target issues emerged. Th ese issues led to the creation 
of working groups to address each issue in the community. Th e issues addressed a community 
garden, transportation, housing, childcare, and reviving the community. Each working group 
was tasked to create goals, activities, and timelines for improving their issue. Two of the working 
group successes are included in the following.
Working Group: Community Garden
An issue identifi ed in the forum was a lack of access to fresh produce in the West Marion commu-
nity. Th is group secured a grant from Resourceful Communities to support the formation of the 
garden. Community members brokered the land share, boy scouts built, and the city of Marion 
paid for the garden information board. In addition, a walking challenge was created to encourage 
people to get out and be active. Many surrounding churches joined in the challenge as a means 
to walk and share in fellowship. Youth in the area help maintain the garden and sell the produce 
at the local farmers’ market. Th e extension has begun providing canning classes along with the 
garden.
Working Group: Transportation
In the West Marion community, residents lack transportation to the grocery store, medical 
appointments, government agencies, and much more. Th e working group secured a grant from 
the Kate B. Reynolds Charitable Trust to fund transportation for anyone in need in the West 
Marion community, specifi cally. In addition, the working group collected signatures to support a 
countywide transportation system.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Why do you think a community forum is a good or not good choice for the West 
Marion community?
2. 
Limited access to supermarkets, supercenters, grocery stores, or other sources of 
healthy and aff ordable food may impede the ability of some Americans to achieve a 
healthy diet. Th e Food Access Research Atlas (FARA) is a web-based mapping tool that 
allows users to investigate access to food stores at the census-tract level.29 Go to FARA 
(www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research-atlas) and fi nd the McDowell 
County census tract. Compare food access to the rest of the state. Are there pockets in 
the state where people have more access to food stores than other areas? Hypothesize 
about what factors infl uence any observed disparity.
3. 
What national or local programs do you think are in place in McDowell County that 
assist in promoting health and wellness? Are there any barriers in McDowell County to 
accessing these programs?


===PAGE 180===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
155
4. 
What other sectors of the food system could be involved in the McDowell County 
Community Engagement Project to strengthen the community impact on promoting 
health, healthy food systems, and the well-being of the community? How would you 
expand or complement this project?
5. 
What strategies were used for policy, systems, and/or environmental changes in 
McDowell County?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
Activity #1: The Food Access Research Atlas (FARA)—The Use of Mapping 
to Understand Food Accessibility
“Limited access to supermarkets, supercenters, grocery stores, or other sources of healthy and 
aff ordable food may impede the ability of some Americans to achieve a healthy diet. Th e Food 
Access Research Atlas (FARA) is a Web-based mapping tool that allows users to investigate access 
to food stores at the census-tract level.”29 Go to FARA (www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food
-access-research-atlas) and fi nd your census tract. Compare food access in your area of residence 
to the rest of the state. Are there pockets in the state where people have more access to food stores 
than other areas? Hypothesize about what factors infl uence any observed disparity.
Activity #2: Community Windshield Tour
A wonderful way to learn more about your community and to begin to understand root causes 
of nutritional and public health needs is to get out and either drive or walk through diff erent 
neighborhoods within your town or community. Th e visual perspective gained through this expe-
rience can be powerful and give insight into the way of life for diverse populations found across 
the community. For this activity, go with a friend or a group of friends to take notes related to 
the physical and social conditions found in the neighborhoods that you visit. Th is could include 
(but is not limited to) grocery stores, gas stations, public transportation, restaurant selections, 
housing, churches/faith-based institutions, schools, and the people you see and the activities they 
are engaged in. Seek to visit these locations at diff erent times of the day and diff erent days of the 
week. In addition, seek to spend some time at one or more of these locations while taking notes 
(restaurant, grocery store, or another public place) and in areas that have contrasting socioeco-
nomic statuses and economic opportunity. From this experience, compile a list of key attributes 
of each neighborhood. What was similar? What was diff erent? What were some of the factors 
involved in the diff erences? How would these diff erences contribute to health disparities in rela-
tion to nutritional health?
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What does an integrated food system look like at the community level?
2. 
In what ways do health disparities and food insecurity impact each other?
3. 
You are tasked with addressing nutritional needs in your community. Please describe 
how you would incorporate elements of food sovereignty, cultural competency, 
social justice, and systems thinking into your approach. What are the challenges and 
opportunities?


===PAGE 181===
156 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Food and Nutrition. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.usda.gov/https://www.usda.gov/topics/
food-and-nutrition.
Growing Food Connections. http://growingfoodconnections.org/about/community-food-systems-planning
Local Food Systems. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.nal.usda.gov/afsic/local-food-systems
Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community Development. https://www.foodsystemsjournal.org/
index.php/fsj
New Entry Sustainable Farming Project. https://nesfp.org/about
Food Security. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https://www.usda.gov/topics/food-and-nutrition/food
-security
Feeding America. https://hungerandhealth.feedingamerica.org/understand-food-insecurity
Community Tool Box. https://ctb.ku.edu/en
Prevention Institute, Developing Eff ective Coalitions. https://www.preventioninstitute.org/publications/
developing-eff ective-coalitions-an-eight-step-guide
Learning for Sustainability. http://learningforsustainability.net
U.S. Food Sovereignty Alliance. http://usfoodsovereigntyalliance.org/what-is-food-sovereignty
American Public Health Association. https://www.apha.org
Th e Nutrition Society, Public Health Nutrition. https://www.nutritionsociety.org/publications/public
-health-nutrition
County Health Rankings. http://www.countyhealthrankings.org
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. https://www.rwjf.org
Th e Community Guide to Preventive Services. https://www.thecommunityguide.org/topic/nutrition
Sustaining Community: Families, Communities, Th e Environment. https://sustainingcommunity.wordpress
.com/2018/05/14/eff ective-engagement
NC State Extension (Local Food). https://localfood.ces.ncsu.edu/local-food-justice
GLOSSARY
Advocacy: Advocacy at the community level consists of “actions” intended to infl uence public 
policy for a particular cause, or to strengthen capacity and mobilize resources, or to decrease 
barriers to health.59,60
Built environment: A community’s built environment—or human-made surroundings—has 
a strong eff ect on what and how people eat.17 Th e type and location of food stores in a commu-
nity, for example, are oft en associated with the diets of residents and their health.18
Coalition: Coalitions are “groups of individuals and/or organizations with a common inter-
est who agree to work together toward a common goal.”50 In eff ect, coalitions are “action ori-
ented,” “analyzing the issue,” “identifying and implementing solutions,” and “creating social 
change”—with the understanding that the best results occur when working collectively rather 
than individually.51
Community development: Community development builds upon the engagement process 
and is focused on an improvement in outcomes, such as the physical environment, cultural 
norms, social and political actions, and enhanced educational and economic opportunities, to 
name a few.43,44 Th is idea is oft en linked to that of community engagement.
Community engagement: Community engagement refers to the process and actions of involv-
ing community members in decision-making that impacts the day-to-day quality of life off ered 
in the community; furthermore, community engagement has consistently been shown to be a 
very eff ective strategy for engaging with and empowering vulnerable populations and reducing 
health inequities.40–42 Th is idea is oft en linked to that of community development.


===PAGE 182===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
157
Cultural competency: Cultural competency refers to one’s ability to respect and value cultural 
diff erences and to one who strives to work eff ectively to address disparities that exist largely 
because of cultural diff erences—developing culturally competent public health professionals is 
vital to the pursuit of health equity.79
Faith-based initiative: Faith-based initiatives, oft en underutilized and garnering little 
attention, are movements in which religious institutions such as churches or nonprofi t 
agencies, either formally or informally, spearhead eff orts and generally partner with public 
health agencies and the medical sector or an institution of higher education for commu-
nity development and improved health.53,54 Th ese eff orts can range from activities in policy 
and advocacy to health education to health promotion programming. With faith being a 
focal point of the culture and spirituality being a driving force in their communities, faith-
based health promotion eff orts have had a great deal of success in both rural and minority 
populations.55–58
Food justice: Food justice refers to food-related social justice matters and has been defi ned as 
“the struggle against racism, exploitation, and oppression taking place within the food system 
that addresses inequality’s root causes both within and beyond the food chain.”39,81
Food security: Th e condition in which all people, at all times, have physical, social, and eco-
nomic access to suffi  cient, safe, and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food 
preferences for an active and healthy life.
Food sovereignty: Food sovereignty is the right for all people to choose healthy and culturally 
appropriate food that is produced through ecologically sound and sustainable methods. Food 
sovereignty focuses on the needs of those who produce, distribute, and consume food, rather 
than the demands of markets and corporations.
Food system: Th e term food system refers to all aspects of producing, buying, selling, eat-
ing, and disposing of food. Th is includes production, processing and aggregation, distribution, 
marketing, consumption, and food waste recovery.
Grassroots: Grassroots movements are organized by ordinary citizens to raise aware-
ness about a cause(s) and to seek change. For example, on a national scale, in the United 
States in recent years, we have seen the Tea Party and the Occupy Wall Street movements 
have success in building momentum for their respective causes. On a more local level, 
we witness communities everyday striving to improve food access and to improve nutri-
tional health—all grounded in a grassroots mentality. Grassroots movements help to build 
excitement, and if done in a positive manner, can create a sense of community and lead to 
sustained change.
Health disparities: Healthy People 2020 defi nes a health disparity as “a particular type of health 
diff erence that is closely linked with social, economic, and/or environmental disadvantage. 
Health disparities “adversely aff ect groups of people who have systematically experienced greater 
obstacles to health based on their racial or ethnic group; religion; socioeconomic status; gender; 
age; mental health; cognitive, sensory, or physical disability; sexual orientation or gender identity; 
geographic location; or other characteristics historically linked to discrimination or exclusion.”22
Health equity: Health equity is the principle of pursuing elimination of health disparities 
because they are unjust. Th e term draws specifi c attention to the underlying social conditions 
that lead to higher health risks and poorer health outcomes for populations that are economi-
cally, socially, or environmentally disadvantaged.23


===PAGE 183===
158 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Health literacy: Health literacy focuses on the general population’s ability to access, compre-
hend, and utilize health information or services.77 We have numerous citizens across our coun-
try with very low health literacy levels, and it is now a foundational principle for Healthy People 
2030.78
Social-Ecological Model (SEM): Th e SEM is a theory-based framework for understanding 
the multifaceted and interactive eff ects of personal and environmental factors that determine 
behaviors and for identifying behavioral and organizational leverage points and intermediaries 
for health promotion within organizations. Th ere are fi ve nested, hierarchical levels of the SEM: 
individual, interpersonal, community, organizational, and policy/enabling environment.
Social justice: Social justice generally refers to the fair and equal treatment of people.
Stakeholders: Stakeholders are described as “any individual or group living within the com-
munity or likely to be aff ected by decisions or actions.”45 Whether it be a rural or urban com-
munity, key stakeholders involved in the food system include an assortment of actors including 
agricultural workers/farmers, local government, nonprofi t agencies and businesses, citizens, 
and most importantly from a public health perspective, those oft en overlooked and/or most 
vulnerable.
Systems thinking: Systems thinking helps us to think about how the system is functioning 
collectively, rather than each individual or agency independently; with this, there are new and 
innovative research strategies being utilized that are also leading to new forms of practice. Th is 
type of thinking and approach forces us to work in a collaborative and interdisciplinary way 
and to get out of our professional silos.
REFERENCES
1. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Programs and Services. 2018. https://www.fns.usda.gov/programs-and
-services
2. Mabli J. SNAP Participation, Food Security, and Geographic Access to Food. Washington, DC: Mathematica 
Policy Research; 2014.
3. Meit, M. Final Report: Exploring Strategies to Improve Health and Equity in Rural Communities. 
Bethesda, MD; Walsh Center for Rural Health Analysis; 2018. http://www.norc.org/PDFs/Walsh%20
Center/Final%20Reports/Rural%20Assets%20Final%20Report%20Feb%2018.pdf
4. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Core Nutrition Messages. 2018. https://www.fns.usda.gov/core-
nutrition/core-nutrition-messages
5. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Education (SNAP-Ed). 
2018. https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-education-snap-ed
6. U.S. Department of Agriculture. SNAP-Ed Strategies and Interventions: An Obesity Prevention Toolkit 
for States. 2016. https://snaped.fns.usda.gov/library/materials/snap-ed-strategies-interventions-obesity
-prevention-toolkit-states
7. Hoelscher D, Springer A, Menendez T, et al. (2011). From NIH to Texas schools: policy impact of the 
Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH) Program in Texas. J Phys Act Health. 2011;8(suppl 
1):S5–S7. doi:10.1123/jpah.8.s1.s5
8. U.S. Department of Agriculture. ChooseMyPlate. 2018. https://www.choosemyplate.gov
9. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Food Labeling. https://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/food-labeling
10. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Team Nutrition. https://www.fns.usda.gov/tn/team-nutrition
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Social determinants of health: know what aff ects health. 
https://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/index.htm
12. Oxford Martin Programme on the Future of Food. What is the food system? https://www.futureoff ood
.ox.ac.uk/what-food-system


===PAGE 184===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
159
13. Shuman M. Th e Local Economy Solution: How Innovative, Self-fi nancing “Pollinator” Enterprises Can 
Grow Jobs and Prosperity. White River, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing; 2015.
14. Hueston W, McLeod A. Overview of the global food system: changes over time/space and lessons for future 
food afety. In: Institute of Medicine, ed. Improving Food Safety Th rough a One Health Approach: Workshop 
Summar. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2012.
15. Bosch RVD. Public health advantages of biological insect controls. Environ Health Perspect. 1976;14:161–
163. doi:10.1289/ehp.7614161
16. Devine G, Furlong, M. Insecticide use: contexts and ecological consequences. Agric Hum Values. 
2007;24:281–306. doi:10.1007/s10460-007-9067-z
17. Prevention Institute. Strategies for Enhancing the Built Environment to Support Healthy Eating and Active 
Living. 
2008. 
https://www.preventioninstitute.org/publications/strategies-for-enhancing-the-built
-environment-to-support-healthy-eating-and-active-living
18. Glanz K, Sallis J, Saelens B, Franks L. Healthy nutrition environments: concepts and measures. Am J 
Health Promot. 2005;19(5):330–333. doi:10.4278/0890-1171-19.5.330
19. Babey S, Diamant A, Hastert T, Harvey S. Designed for Disease: Th e Link Between Local Food Environments 
and Obesity and Diabetes. Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Center for Health Policy Research; 2008.
20. Moore L, Roux AD, Nettleton J, Jacobs D. Associations of the local food environment with diet quality—a 
comparison of assessments based on surveys and geographic information systems. Am J Epidemiol. 
2008;167(8):917–924. doi:10.1093/aje/kwm394
21. Cooksey-Stowers K. Schwartz MB, Brownell KD. Food swamps predict obesity rates better than 
food deserts in the United States. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(11):1366. doi:10.3390/
ijerph14111366
22. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Disparities. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/
about/foundation-health-measures/disparities.
23. Braveman P. What are health disparities and health equity? We need to be clear. Public Health Rep. 
2014;129(1 suppl 2):5–8. doi:10.1177/00333549141291S203
24. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Ag and Food Statistics: Charting the 
Essentials/Food Security and Nutrition Assistance; 2013. https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/
ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/
25. Hilmers A, Hilmers D, Dave J. Neighborhood disparities in access to healthy foods and their eff ects 
on environmental justice. Am J Public Health. 2012;102(9):1644–1654. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2012.300865
26. Morland K, Wing S, Roux AD, Poole C. Neighborhood characteristics associated with the location of food 
stores and food service places. Am J Prev Med. 2002;22(1):23–29. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(01)00403-2
27. Vallianatos M, Shaff er A, Gottlieb R. Transportation and Food: Th e Importance of Access. Los Angeles, 
CA: Center for Food and Justice, Urban and Environmental Policy Institute; 2002.
28. Food and Agriculture Organization. Rome Declaration on World Food Security and World Food Summit 
Plan of Action. Rome: World Food Summit; 1996.
29. Coleman-Jensen A, Rabbitt A, Gregory A, Singh A. Household Food Security in the United States in 2016. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2017.
30. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Defi nitions of food security. https://www
.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/defi nitions-of-food-security
.aspx. Updated September 4, 2019.
31. International Food Policy Research Institute. Food security. https://www.ifpri.org/topic/food-security
32. Shankar P, Chung R, Frank D. Association of food insecurity with children’s behavioral, emotional, 
and academic outcomes: a systematic review. J Dev Behav Pediatr. 2017;38(2):135–150. doi:10.1097/
DBP.0000000000000383
33. Myers A, Painter M. Food insecurity in the United States of America: an examination of race/ethnicity 
and nativity. Food Secur. 2017;9(6):1419–1432. doi:10.1007/s12571-017-0733-8
34. Jones A. Food insecurity and mental health status: a global analysis of 149 countries. Am J Prev Med. 
2017;53(2):264–273. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2017.04.008
35. Food and Agriculture Organization. Global Agriculture Towards 2050. Rome: High Level Expert Forum: 
How to Feed the World in 2050; 2009.
36. Clendenning J, Dressler W, Richards C. Food justice or food sovereignty? Understanding the rise of urban 
food movements in the USA. Agric Hum Values. 2016;33:165–177. doi:10.1007/s10460-015-9625-8


===PAGE 185===
160 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
37. McMichael P, Porter C. Going public with notes on cousins, food sovereignty, and food dignity. J Agric 
Food Syst Community Dev. 2018;8(suppl 1):207–212. doi:10.5304/jafscd.2018.08A.015
38. Food Secure Canada. What Is Food Sovereignty. 2018. https://foodsecurecanada.org/who-we-are/what
-food-sovereignty
39. Glennie C, Alkon A. Food justice: cultivating the fi eld. Environ Res Lett. 2018;13(7):073003. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aac4b2
40. Cyril S, Smith B, Possami-Inesedy A, Renzaho A. Exploring the role of community engagement 
in improving the health of disadvantaged populations: a systematic review. Glob Health Action. 
2015;8(1):29842. doi:10.3402/gha.v8.29842
41. O’Mara-Eves A, Brunton G, McDaid G, et al. Community engagement to reduce inequalities in 
health: a systematic review, meta-analysis and economic analysis. Public Health Res. 2013;1(4):1–526. 
doi:10.3310/phr01040
42. Swainston K, Summerbell C. Th e Eff ectiveness of Community Engagement Approaches and Methods for 
Health Promotion Interventions. 2008.
43. Phillips R, Pittman R. An Introduction to Community Development. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Routledge; 
2014.
44. Phillips R, Wharton C. Growing Livelihoods: Local Food Systems and Community Development. New 
York, NY: Routledge; 2015.
45. Alexander M. Local communities and stakeholders. In: Alexander M. Management Planning for Nature 
Conservation. Dordrecht, Th e Netherlands: Springer; 2013.
46. Nelson C, Stroink M. Accessibility and viability: a complex adaptive systems approach to a wicked 
problem for the local food movement. J Agric Food Syst Community Dev. 2014;4(4):191–206. doi:10.5304/
jafscd.2014.044.016
47. Mathie A, Cunningham G. From clients to citizens: asset-based community development as a strategy 
for community-driven development. Dev Pract. 2003;13(5):474–486. doi:10.1080/0961452032000
125857
48. Ellis G, Walton S. Building partnerships between local health departments and communities: case 
studies in capacity building and cultural humility. In: Minkler M, ed. Community Organizing and 
Community Building for Health and Welfare. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press; 2012.
49. Haines A. Asset-based community development. In: Phillips R, Pittman R, eds. An Introduction to 
Community Development. New York, NY: Routledge; 2014.
50. Doyle E, Ward S, Oomen-Early J. Th e Process of Community Health Education and Promotion. Long 
Grove, IL: Waveland Press; 2009.
51. Butterfoss F, Kegler M. A coalition model for community action. In: Minkler M, ed. Community 
Organizing and Community Building for Health and Welfare. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University 
Press; 2012.
52. Feigherty E, Rogers T. Building and maintaining eff ective coalitions. Palo Alto, CA: Health Promotion 
Resource Center, Stanford Center for Research in Disease Prevention; 1990.
53. Levin J. Faith-based initiatives in health promotion: history, challenges, and current partnerships. Am J 
Health Promot. 2014;28(3):139–141. doi:10.4278/ajhp.130403-CIT-149
54. Levin J. Partnerships between the faith-based and medical sectors: implications for preventive medicine 
and public health. Prev Med Rep. 2016;4:344–350. doi:10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.07.009
55. Campbell M, Hudson M, Resnicow K, et al. Church-based health promotion interventions: 
evidence and lessons learned. Annu Rev Public Health. 2007;28:213–234. doi:10.1146/annurev
.publhealth.28.021406.144016
56. Wilcox S, Laken M, Parrott A, et al. Th e faith, activity, and nutrition (FAN) program: design of a 
participatory research intervention to increase physical activity and improve dietary habits in African 
American churches. Contemp Clin Trials. 2010;31(4):323–335. doi:10.1016/j.cct.2010.03.011
57. Yanek L, Becker D, Moy T, et al. Project Joy: faith based cardiovascular health promotion for African 
American women. Public Health Rep. 2001;116:68–81. doi:10.1093/phr/116.S1.68
58. Yeary K. Rural church-based health promotion. In: Warren J, Smalley K, eds. Rural Public Health: Best 
Practices and Preventive Models. New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company; 2014.
59. Cohen B, Marshall S. Does public health advocacy seek to redress health inequities? A scoping review. 
Health Soc Care Community. 2017;25(2):309–328. doi:10.1111/hsc.12320


===PAGE 186===
 
7. Promoting Nutritional Health 
161
60. Loue S. Community health advocacy. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2006;60(6):458–463. doi:10.1136/
jech.2004.023044
61. Cullerton K, Donnet T, Lee A, Gallegos D. Using political science to progress public health nutrition: a 
systematic review. Public Health Nutr. 2016;19(11):2070–2078. doi:10.1017/S1368980015002712
62. Freedman D, Bess K. Food systems change and the environment: local and global connections. Am J 
Community Psychol. 2011;47:397–409. doi:10.1007/s10464-010-9392-z
63. Allen P. Realizing justice in local food systems. Cambridge J Reg Econ Soc. 2010;3:295–308. doi:10.1093/
cjres/rsq015
64. Neff  R, Merrigan K, Wallinga D. A food systems approach to healthy food and agriculture policy. Health 
Aff . 2015;34(11):1908–1915. doi:10.1377/hlthaff .2015.0926
65. Bradley E, Canavan M, Rogan E, et al. Variation in health outcomes: the role of spending on social 
services, public health, and health care, 2000-09. Health Aff . 2016;35(5):760–768. doi:10.1377/
hlthaff .2015.0814
66. Carey G, Malbon E, Carey N, et al. Systems science and systems thinking for public health: a systematic 
review of the fi eld. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e009002. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-009002
67. Leischow S, Best A, Trochim W, et al. Systems thinking to improve the public’s health. Am J Prev Med. 
2008;35(2):S196–S203. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2008.05.014
68. Swanson R, Cattaneo A, Bradley E, et al. Rethinking health systems strengthening: key systems thinking 
tools and strategies for transformational change. Health Policy Plan. 2012;27(suppl 4):iv54–iv61. 
doi:10.1093/heapol/czs090
69. Wave TV, Scutchfi eld F, Honore P. Recent advances in public health systems research in the United 
States. Annu Rev Public Health. 2010;31:283–295. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103550
70. Golden S, Earp J. Social ecological approaches to individuals and their contexts: twenty years of health 
education and behavior health promotion interventions. Health Educ Behav. 2012;39(3):364–372. 
doi:10.1177/1090198111418634
71. McLeroy K, Bibeau D, Steckler A, Glanz K. An ecological perspective on health promotion programs. 
Health Educ Q. 1988;15(4):351–377. doi:10.1177/109019818801500401
72. Stokols D. Translating social ecological theory into guidelines for community health promotion. Am J 
Health Promot. 1996;10(4):282–298. doi:10.4278/0890-1171-10.4.282
73. Hanlon P, Carlisle S, Hannah M, et al. A perspective on the future public health: an integrative and 
ecological framework. Perspect Public Health. 2012;132(6):313–319. doi:10.1177/1757913912440781
74. Lee B, Bartsch S, Mui Y, et al. A systems approach to obesity. Nutr Rev. 2016;75(S1):94–106. doi:10.1093/
nutrit/nuw049
75. Haider M, Kreps G. Forty years of diff usion of innovations: utility and value in public health. J Health 
Commun. 2004;9:3–11. doi:10.1080/10810730490271430
76. Crosby R, DiClemente R, Salazar L. Diff usion of innovations theory. In: DiClemente R, Salazar L, Crosby 
R, eds. Health Behavior Th eory for Public Health: Principles, Foundations, and Applications. Burlington, 
MA: Jones & Bartlett; 2013:211–230.
77. Batterham R, Hawkins M, Collins P, et al. Health literacy: applying current concepts to improve health 
services and reduce health inequalities. Public Health. 2016;132:3–12. doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2016.01.001
78. Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2030 Framework. Healthy People 
2030; 2018. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/About-Healthy-People/Development-Healthy-People
-2030/Framework
79. Cushman L, Delva M, Franks C, et al. Cultural competency training for public health students: 
integrating self, social, and global awareness into a master of public health curriculum. Am J Public 
Health. 2015;105(suppl 1):S132–S140. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2014.302506
80. Zurcher K, Doctor L, Imig G. Food & fi tness: lessons learned for funders. Health Promot Pract. 
2018;19(supp 1):9S–14S. doi:10.1177/1524839918783974
81. Hislop R. Reaping Equity Across the USA: FJ Organizations Observed at the National Scale. International 
Agricultural Development Graduate Group, University of California Davis; 2014.


===PAGE 188===
8
RURAL HEALTH: IMPORTANCE OF 
INTERPROFESSIONAL APPROACH
KYLE L. THOMPSON, MELISSA GUTSCHALL, AND DOMINIQUE M. ROSE
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe three standard defi nitions of the term rural and select the most appropriate defi -
nition for specifi c applications.
2. Compare and contrast similarities and diff erences regarding the rural environment versus 
the urban environment, including strengths and challenges of the rural environment.
3. Defi ne healthcare access, quality, and equity as these issues impact rural residents, and 
be able to categorize common barriers to healthcare, including nutrition care, for rural 
residents.
4. Identify common nutrition-impacted health conditions associated with rural settings, in-
cluding chronic diseases, substance abuse, and food security and associated outcomes.
5. List characteristics of healthcare professionals who choose to practice in rural settings 
and describe several common issues that rural public health nutrition practitioners (PHN 
practitioners) may face.
6. Describe basic skills of cultural competence and develop a plan for applying those skills in 
public health nutrition practice.
7. Describe the four components of the Rural Health Nutrition Practice Model (RHNPM) 
and categorize selected characteristics of a given rural population within the RHNPM.
8. Use the RHNPM to describe an interprofessional framework for rural public health nu-
trition practice.
9. Develop a plan for acquiring the necessary knowledge and skills to practice public health 
nutrition in a chosen rural setting.
INTRODUCTION
Much attention is currently focused on policy, strategies, interventions, funding sources, and 
methods for delivering eff ective public health nutrition interventions to rural populations in the 
United States.1 Persons residing in rural areas oft en face challenges in accessing healthcare and 
safe, adequate food supplies.2 Sociocultural factors including culturally based health beliefs and 
behaviors may impact rates of chronic disease, which are generally higher in rural than urban 


===PAGE 189===
164 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
settings.3 While urban populations, too, are aff ected by unique sociocultural and socioeconomic 
infl uences, rurality itself may exacerbate diffi  culties in accessing appropriate health and nutrition 
resources. Th is chapter examines the theory and practice of public health nutrition in rural health 
settings.
Th roughout this chapter, it is of crucial importance for the reader to understand that when 
referring to “rural,” there are no uniform characteristics of populations that live in rural parts of 
the country, and there is no monolithic “rural population.” Th e challenges facing “coastal rural” are 
diff erent from “mountain rural” or “frontier rural.” In general, some issues are similar, for example, 
access to healthcare, food, and resources, but other issues, particularly cultural, are diff erent. Th us, 
each rural population group is unique in its cultural distinctives and its nutrition needs.
WHAT IS “RURAL”?
What does it mean for a person, population, or facility in the United States to be rural? Is rural 
a subjective concept, existing in the mind of each individual as a particular mix of farms, fi elds, 
ranches, wilderness, mountains, forests, and wide open spaces?4 Can rural be described by num-
bers? Is rurality dependent on the remoteness of the setting or on population density? And, if 
population numbers are the distinguishing characteristic of rurality, exactly what is the cutoff  
point that diff erentiates rural from urban settings? Th e fact that a number of diff erent methods 
have been proposed for defi ning rurality indicates that rural is a complex concept, with many 
diff erent aspects of the environmental and sociocultural setting infl uencing the categorization of 
a particular geographic area.
Rural settings can range from remote villages in Alaska accessible only by plane to ranches in 
Wyoming located hours by car from the nearest hospital, to mountainous regions of southern 
Appalachia where some residents still live in isolated hollers, to southern coastal areas, which 
have experienced catastrophic economic shift s resulting in high rates of poverty and poor access 
to healthcare, and to New England farms located in close proximity to major population centers. A 
majority of counties in the United States have both rural and urban areas. Th e rural environment 
in the United States is highly diverse, dynamic, and constantly changing.5 Similarly, the people 
who live and work in rural areas are diverse, with an extensive range of diff erences in socioeco-
nomic status, education levels, ability to access healthcare, and food and nutrition practices.5
Th us, there is no one defi nition of the term rural. Many defi nitions have been created over the 
years.6 Specifi c defi nitions become important, however, when seeking funding for rural health 
programming such as public health nutrition programs.6 Th e U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) Rural Information Center (RIC) continues to reference a seminal report, published by 
the U.S. General Accounting Offi  ce (GAO) in 1993, in providing three major federal defi nitions 
of the term rural that are commonly used in public health settings.7 It is important to remember 
that the federal government considers rural to be defi ned by exclusion; that is, the boundaries or 
characteristics of urban areas are defi ned and described, and whatever is not urban is considered 
rural. Th e three primary federal defi nitions originate in the U.S. Census Bureau (USCB), the 
Offi  ce of Management and Budget (OMB), and the U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic 
Research Service (USDA ERS):
1. 
Th e USCB urban–rural classifi cation:
 
Th e USCB does not utilize city or county boundaries when defi ning urban and 
rural areas, but rather delineates census tracts according to their concentrations of 


===PAGE 190===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
165
residents.8 Th us, the USCB characterization of rural is primarily geographic, based on 
density of population and land use. Th e USCB recognizes two types of urban areas:
a. 
Urbanized areas (UAs) of 50,000 or more people
b. Urban clusters (UCs) of at least 2,500 but less than 50,000 people9
 
All persons, homes, and territory not located within a UA or a UC are considered 
rural.8 As a result of the 2010 census, the USCB found that about 21% of the popula-
tion, or 59.5 million people, and 95% of the land area of the United States is considered 
rural.9 Th e USCB defi nition classifi es a great deal of suburban area as rural, and thus 
may tend to overestimate the number of rural residents.9
2. 
OMB delineation of metropolitan and nonmetropolitan statistical areas:
 
In 1950, the Bureau of the Budget, which later became the OMB, established the con-
cept of “standard metropolitan areas.”10 Th is designation has since been expanded and 
refi ned to include core-based statistical areas comprising metropolitan and nonmetro-
politan counties, using county boundaries to provide a metro or nonmetro designation 
for each U.S. county.10
 
Metropolitan counties are usually divided into two types:
a. 
Metro counties are central counties containing a core, densely populated urban 
area with at least 50,000 inhabitants.
b. Counties designated as metro may also include those that are adjacent to a core 
urban county, and demonstrate a high degree of linkage with the core area as 
assessed by commuting patterns.10
 
Nonmetropolitan counties are subdivided into two types:
a. 
Micropolitan counties are those containing a core urban area with at least 10,000 
but no more than 50,000 inhabitants, plus adjoining surrounding counties with a 
high degree of linkage with the core area as assessed by commuting patterns.
b. All remaining counties, which are oft en labeled non-core rural counties because 
they do not meet the core requirements for either a metropolitan or a micropoli-
tan designation, are considered nonmetropolitan.10
 
Note that the OMB defi nitions of metro and nonmetro areas are not designed to 
specify whether a particular county is urban or rural. Rather, the only purpose for the 
OMB designations is to provide a consistent set of descriptions to be used to collect, 
analyze, and disseminate federal statistics for designated geographic areas.10 Th e OMB 
defi nitions refl ect a socioeconomic, labor-market perspective on rurality, and off er the 
ability to utilize accessible county data for a variety of indicators. Most rural research-
ers consider the nonmetropolitan designation to be more consistent with a rural 
classifi cation since the designation of a town of 10,000 residents as a “core urban area” 
may be confusing. When using the OMB delineations, it is important to remember 
that because rurality is a continuum, and because a majority of U.S. counties contain 
both urban and rural areas, highly rural areas can be classifi ed as “metro.”4 Th us, the 
OMB metro–nonmetro designations may tend to underestimate the numbers of rural 
residents and rural areas. For example, the Grand Canyon, arguably a remote area of 
the United States, is found in a metro county.


===PAGE 191===
166 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
3. 
USDA defi nition of rural:
 
Th e USDA, while offi  cially utilizing no one defi nition of rural, recognizes both the 
USCB and the OMB defi nitions, noting that each defi nition is useful in specifi c con-
texts.11 In order to enhance the utility of the OMB metro–nonmetro designations, the 
USDA ERS has developed two additional county-level classifi cation systems utilizing 
OMB metro–nonmetro designation data. First, Rural–Urban Continuum Codes 
(RUCCs) have been prepared on the county level (Table 8.1).11 Th e codes subdivide the 
OMB metro and nonmetro designations into three metro and six nonmetro categories, 
for a total of nine categories. Th e designations take into consideration the population 
numbers in metro counties. For nonmetro counties, the degree of urbanization and 
whether adjoining to metro counties are considered. Th e RUCCs allow research-
ers, government agencies, health professionals, and other interested parties to more 
specifi cally identify population groups of interest, and in the case of rural researchers, 
to better identify trends occurring in rural areas.11 Th e second county-level classifi ca-
tion system, Urban Infl uence Codes (UICs), off ers 10 categories, two for metropolitan 
counties and eight for nonmetro counties. While similar to RUCCs, UICs off er greater 
distinctions among rural counties, and consider adjacency to both metropolitan coun-
ties and nonmetropolitan counties with a large town.92
 
At the census tract level, the Federal Offi  ce of Rural Health Policy (FORHP) has 
collaborated with the USDA ERS to develop Rural–Urban Commuting Area (RUCA) 
Codes.9 RUCAs assign each census tract a code ranging from 1 to 10, based on standard 
USCB rural–urban census tract defi nitions plus commuting pattern data. RUCAs from 
4 to 10 are considered “rural.” Th e use of RUCA codes allows for the identifi cation of 
TABLE 8.1 RURAL–URBAN CONTINUUM CODES
CODE
DESCRIPTION
METRO COUNTIES
1
Counties in metro areas of 1 million population or more
2
Counties in metro areas of 250,000 to 1 million population
3
Counties in metro areas of fewer than 250,000 population
NONMETRO COUNTIES
4
Urban population of 20,000 or more, adjacent to a metro area
5
Urban population of 20,000 or more, not adjacent to a metro area
6
Urban population of 2,500 to 19,999, adjacent to a metro area
7
Urban population of 2,500 to 19,999, not adjacent to a metro area
8
Completely rural or less than 2,500 population, adjacent to a metro 
area
9
Completely rural or less than 2,500 population, not adjacent to a metro 
area
Source: From U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Rural-Urban Continuum Codes. 2013. https://
www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuum-codes/documentation


===PAGE 192===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
167
rural areas (RUCAs 4–10) within metropolitan counties (RUCCs 1–3). Because most 
U.S. counties contain both urban and rural areas, the RUCA designation allows for a 
more nuanced assessment of the rurality of a given location. In the United States, there 
are 132 very large census tracts in which the RUCA codes are inconsistent, given low 
population density and long drives to access services; these areas have been designated 
“rural” even though their offi  cial RUCA code is 2 or 3.9 RUCAs help to improve the 
accuracy of urban–rural classifi cations provided by the USCB, which tends to over-
estimate the rural population, and the OMB, which tends to underestimate the rural 
population.9 A potential disadvantage of RUCA codes is that they are based on census 
tracts, which may change over time, while county boundaries in general remain fi xed.
Rural Defi nitions and the PHN Practitioner
When choosing a defi nition of rural to use for research, securing funds for nutrition programs, 
or policy development, the PHN practitioner should consider the overarching purpose of the 
particular project. For example, a project designed to analyze the advance of suburbs into farm-
lands might be best served by using the USCB defi nition, because it is based on land use and 
distinguishes highly urbanized areas from nonurbanized locations. Similarly, the OMB defi nition 
is oft en used in applications examining socioeconomic factors and infl uences, because it refl ects 
regional employment patterns based on the identifi cation of economic centers of activity. If a 
researcher is interested in examining the commuting practices of nurses who work in rural criti-
cal access hospitals, the RUCAs may provide the most useful foundation for acquiring necessary 
data for analysis. Funding entities oft en mandate the particular rural defi nition to be used for spe-
cifi c grant applications; thus, the PHN practitioner should always confi rm the correct defi nition 
to be used with the funding agency when seeking third-party resources.
Finally, the PHN practitioner should always keep in mind that there is no one clear defi ni-
tion of the word rural. Rural–urban classifi cations are not a clear dichotomy; rather, there is a 
rural–urban continuum.11 A majority of Americans live in areas that comprise some mixture of 
urban and rural components.11 Factors such as population, age, impairments, mean income, and 
access to healthcare resources may not be refl ected in standard defi nitions and may require the 
identifi cation of other data sources in order to acquire desired information.12 Th e PHN practi-
tioner should strive to avoid generalizations and should seek specifi c information on the location, 
demographics, social infl uences, cultural practices, and unique challenges of the rural population 
being served. By carefully studying the geography, culture, and resources of a given rural set-
ting, including the area’s federal rural/urban designations, PHN practitioners can most eff ectively 
intervene to improve the nutritional status of populations.
SIMILARITIES AND DIFFERENCES REGARDING THE RURAL 
VERSUS THE URBAN HEALTH ENVIRONMENT
Persons with a rudimentary understanding of rural America may come away from discussions of 
rural health and economic disparities with the thought, “Why don’t rural people just move to places 
where greater opportunity is available?” A deeper investigation of rural issues reveals that in the 
broader context, strong and healthy rural regions are vital to the entire nation’s well-being and secu-
rity. All persons who value a ready food supply, adequate energy resources, and a viable national 
defense, among other benefi ts, should be concerned about the well-being of rural America. Indeed, 
rural and urban areas are highly interdependent, and the best interests of both are intertwined.


===PAGE 193===
168 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Rural America has many strengths and assets that can be leveraged to address challenges.13 
Community assets in rural areas encompass the collective strengths of rural individuals, organi-
zations, and communities.13 A fi rst step toward identifying rural community assets may be listing 
those factors that make rural areas attractive places to live: friendly people, strong community 
ties, and an ethic of volunteerism and altruism among residents, among many others.13,14 Rural 
communities may display a sense of interconnectedness that is evidenced in strong social net-
works. Observers of rural communities oft en note behaviors such as neighborliness and willing-
ness to assist each other and the community in diffi  cult circumstances.14 Traits that are commonly 
valued in rural settings include independence, self-suffi  ciency, persistence, and resilience in the 
face of diffi  culties.13 Rural residents oft en claim strong ties to the land based on family/commu-
nity history; this sense of home and family can be motivating when the well-being and survival of 
that home is at stake, and creative thinking and a willingness to do things diff erently are needed. 
Interactions among rural residents and local organizations, such as schools and faith-based orga-
nizations, can result in strong networks for economic growth, community improvements, and 
individual support.13,15 Rural community assets may also include natural resources, agricultural 
operations, manufacturing facilities, fi nancial institutions, healthcare facilities such as hospitals 
and nursing homes, and other entities that provide opportunities for local and regional growth.13 
Th e development of eff ective models for enhancing the sustainability of community assets, which 
are not always under community control, is key to optimizing rural strengths.13
Public health nutrition professionals who work in rural areas will do well to begin with an 
assessment of community strengths and assets before assessing the barriers to implementing an 
intervention (even though the barriers may be daunting). Th e results of a strengths and assets 
assessment may reveal surprising possibilities and avenues for moving forward with positive 
change. Figure 8.1 provides a model for assessing rural strengths and assets.
Rural Environments Compared With Urban Environments
In recent years, the balance between rural and urban well-being in the United States has shift ed 
toward metropolitan areas. Trends over the past three decades have indicated that by a variety 
of measures, rural U.S. populations’ well-being has decreased while urban populations’ well-be-
ing has increased.16,17 Worsening statistics in regard to population decline, economic well-being, 
teen pregnancies, chronic disease rates, and poverty, among others, have been noted in rural 
America.16 Another journalist described the phenomenon of younger residents leaving rural areas 
to migrate to urban locations as “the graying of rural America.”18 In some areas of the United 
States, rural population losses have been signifi cant and have contributed to an increase in the 
average age of rural residents. Between July 2015 and July 2016, nonmetro counties as a whole 
showed an overall population loss of about 21,000 residents for the fi rst time since data has been 
accumulated, although a number of nonmetro counties had been experiencing modest popula-
tion losses for some time.19 It should be noted that population loss fi gures are for the general non-
metro population; there is much variation among rural areas, and some have gained population 
within the described time frame. Wage and salary losses caused by shift s in economic centers over 
the past three decades have resulted in decreased economic opportunities for many rural dwell-
ers.18,20 In general, it appears that over the past several decades, many rural environments in the 
United States have become less viable places to build careers and lives.20
Th e challenges faced in accessing healthcare by persons who work and live in rural America 
may diff er in kind, if not in severity, from diffi  culties encountered in urban settings. Both 
urban and rural low-income populations experience health disparities resulting in reduced life 


===PAGE 194===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
169
expectancy and poor health outcomes. Data indicate that a greater number of healthcare pro-
viders and resources are available in urban areas.21 Th us, accessibility issues for the urban poor 
tend to center on lack of fi nancial resources and transportation to obtain care rather than geo-
graphic remoteness of care providers.21 Th e urban poor may also live in closer geographic proxim-
ity to hospital EDs, where the federal Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) 
requires that all persons must be provided with medical screening examinations and treatment 
for emergency conditions, including labor and delivery of babies, regardless of the ability to pay.22
Rural residents seeking healthcare face obstacles endemic to current reality in much of 
rural America: limited economic and educational opportunities, a dearth of infrastructure and 
dedicated resources based on lack of recognition by government entities, and, in many cases, 
geographic isolation.2 Th e sheer distance that must be traveled to access facilities such as EDs, 
hospitals, clinics, and full-service grocery stores can become a daunting barrier to obtaining 
care and maintaining health. Rural environments oft en result in situations in which many rural 
Americans, especially low-income persons, face substantial health disparities, including nutrition 
disparities.2,23–27
Barriers to Healthcare Access and Equity That Impact Rural Residents
Both urban and rural health settings present challenges for the PHN practitioner. However, the 
distinctive elements of rural environments tend to present a unique set of diffi  culties for rural 
residents in regard to issues of access, quality, and equity. Lack of economic opportunities in rural 
FIGURE 8.1 Rural assets map.
Source: From the Walsh Center for Rural Health Analysis, Meit M. Final Report: Exploring Strategies to Improve Health 
and Equity in Rural Communities. Bethesda, MD: Walsh Center for Rural Health Analysis; 2018. http://www.norc.org/
PDFs/Walsh%20Center/Final%20Reports/Rural%20Assets%20Final%20 Report%20Feb%2018.pdf
Assets
Contextual Factors: Political environment, policies, history
Outcomes
Individual
Assets
Community
Assets
Cultural Assets
Organizational
Assets
Social support
Healthy behaviors
Self-determination
Resilience
Cultural
sensitivity
Adaptability
Mentorship
Healthier communities
Communal
history/storytelling
Relationship to land
Family/kinship
Cultural
groups
Values/beliefs
Cooperative extension
Workforce programs
Government agencies
Healthcare systems
Public health
Social services
Parks and recreation
Built environment
Investments
Natural
resources
Food systems
Libraries
Media
Law
Leadership
Financial
institutions
Civic organizations
Local businesses
Sports entities
Social networks
Neighborhood
associations
Faith-based
organizations
Educational
institutions
Youth
organi-
zations
Independence
Entrepreneurship
Adaptive capacities
Population
characteristics
Non
   profits
Knowledge/
skills
Civic/community
engagement
Broadband
infrastructure
Employers
Community development
Sustainability
Social cohesion
Collective efficacy
Service learning
Community ties
Health literacy
Patient adherence
Improved
communication
Economic opportunities
Interdisciplinary collaboration
Decreased stigma


===PAGE 195===
170 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
areas can exacerbate access issues, as rural residents may not have employer-provided basic health 
insurance or insurance coverage for ancillary services such as dental or mental health treatments. 
Healthcare options available to rural residents may not be equivalent in quality to services pro-
vided in a more urban area. For a number of key indicators, data indicate worse outcomes for 
rural communities than urban communities.23 Th e National Rural Health Association and other 
investigators have provided information on a number of rural healthcare and health status dis-
parities related to access to care and equity of care:
 
■
While approximately 17% of Americans resided in rural areas at the time of this 
writing, only 9% of physicians and 16% of nurses choose to practice in rural locations. 
Inadequate numbers of primary care providers, dental professionals, and mental health 
practitioners plague rural America.28

{
As of December 31, 2019, the U.S. Bureau of Health Workforce identifi ed a total of 
7,026 designated Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs). Of these, 4,145 
(59.0%) were located in rural areas, while 2,416 (34.39%) were located in nonrural 
areas. Partially rural areas encompassed 461 HPSAs (6.56%).29

{
As of December 31, 2019, the U.S. Bureau of Health Workforce identifi ed a total 
of 5,833 designated dental HPSAs.26 Of these, 3,449 (59.13%) were located in rural 
areas, while 2,042 (35.01%) were located in nonrural areas. Partially rural areas 
encompassed 337 (5.78%) dental HPSAs.

{
As of December 31, 2019, the U.S. Bureau of Health Workforce identifi ed a total 
of 5,124 designated mental HPSAs. Of these, 2,721 (53.10%) were located in 
rural areas, while 1,964 (38.33%) were located in nonrural areas.29 Partially rural 
areas encompassed 436 (8.51%) mental HPSAs. Even if mental health services are 
available, research suggests that in some rural cultures, there may be a substantial 
stigma associated with the utilization of mental health services.30
 
■
Rural residents have less access to public transportation options and may drive older 
and less reliable vehicles if a personal automobile is available. Th us, the ability to travel 
to healthcare facilities is reduced in rural areas.31
 
■
Since the late 1980s, there has been an alarming trend toward U.S. rural hospital 
closures.32,33 Th e number of closures leveled off  in the early 2000s, but accelerated 
again following the Great Recession of 2008. Since 2005, at least 168 rural hospitals 
have closed, with the majority of closures occurring in the southern United States. 
Rural hospital closures have been associated with reduced availability of emergency 
medical services, migration of physicians and other health professionals out of aff ected 
communities, and greater diffi  culty in accessing both primary and specialty care since 
a hospital is oft en the gateway to care.34 While closing a struggling small hospital and 
subsequently referring patients to a regional institution may be sensible and pru-
dent from a strictly fi nancial standpoint, there are many unexpected consequences 
and eff ects of such closures that should be considered. Closure of a rural hospital is 
devastating economically because the hospital is oft en one of its community’s largest 
employers.34 Downstream eff ects include loss of a substantial percentage of a small 
community’s jobs, shrinkage of the local tax base which may reduce access to other 
services such as education, reduced per capita income, and increased diffi  culty attract-
ing potential employers to the aff ected community.35 In addition, rural hospitals tend 
to be centers of community life, which have served local residents for decades during 
both happy and diffi  cult life events. When such a hospital closes, the ensuing losses are 
not only economic but emotional, with a community’s sense of place, pride, and self-ef-
fi cacy suff ering a severe blow.


===PAGE 196===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
171
 
■
Rural patients are not as likely to have ready access to specialty care clinics such as 
oncology centers, EDs, or ICUs.36
 
■
According to Moy et al., between 1999 and 2014, nonmetropolitan areas experienced 
higher death rates than metropolitan areas for heart disease, stroke, cancer, accidental 
injuries, and chronic lung disease.36 Th e investigators listed possible causative factors 
such as reduced access to healthcare and preventive care services, poor access to health 
insurance, diffi  culty in accessing high-level emergency care, and reduced emergency 
response capabilities.
 
■
Emergency service response times have been found to be as much as 50% longer for 
rural residents than urban residents.37 Death rates from unintended injury are about 
50% higher in rural than urban areas, with longer emergency response times consid-
ered a contributing factor.36 Rural patients are more likely to die from acute myocardial 
infarctions (heart attacks) than urban patients.38 One group of investigators who studied 
data from Nebraska suggested that the larger number of rural deaths from heart attacks 
could result from (a) discrepancies in the quality of care provided because patients in 
rural hospitals are less likely to see a cardiologist; (b) lack of equipment and resources 
in rural hospitals to provide state-of-the-art care; and (c) longer transportation times in 
accessing care, resulting in delays in the administration of clot-busting medications.
 
■
Rural women are not as likely as urban women to obtain screening mammograms and 
are more likely than urban women to cite cost and distance as barriers to obtaining 
screenings.39
 
■
Rural residence was associated with a higher incidence of retinopathy in patients diag-
nosed with diabetes, and the study investigators suggested that distance to care and 
availability of specialty care could be factors contributing to poor outcomes.40
Rural Health Equity and Social Determinants of Health
 
■
Rural residents are less likely to be insured overall, less likely to have private insurance, 
and oft en lack access to dental, vision, and mental health benefi ts.25,36,41 Many rural 
health providers, particularly oral health providers, do not accept Medicaid benefi ts.
 
■
Compared with urban children, rural children are more likely to be poor (23.5% vs. 
20.2%). Th e national average poverty rate at the time of writing is 14.4%; two thirds of 
America’s rural counties have poverty rates equal to or exceeding this benchmark.2
 
■
Rural residents’ per capita average annual income is $9,242 lower than that of similar 
urban counterparts, and rural residents’ incomes are more likely to fall below the fed-
erally designated poverty level.24
 
■
While rural areas may have increased needs for infrastructure to support the devel-
opment and growth of healthy communities, funds to provide vital infrastructure and 
equitable opportunities are oft en lacking.42
 
■
Lack of availability of equitable educational, economic, and social supports—along 
with a tendency of young people to migrate to urban areas—have led to high rates of 
joblessness.43 Fewer employment opportunities are available in rural areas, leading to 
higher numbers of uninsured individuals.
 
■
Inability to access resources such as public transportation, broadband Internet services, 
and aff ordable housing contributes signifi cantly to rural health disparities.42
Th us, access, quality, and equity in healthcare remain serious issues for many rural-dwelling 
people.


===PAGE 197===
172 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
COMMON NUTRITION-IMPACTED HEALTH CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED 
WITH RURAL SETTINGS
Overall mortality rates in the United States have trended downward since this statistic has 
been measured.44 Both rural and urban death rates have declined over the decades; how-
ever, the declines are consistently smaller for rural as compared to urban populations.26 For 
most health measures, micropolitan and noncore areas lag behind more urbanized locations 
(Figure 8.2).45
Mortality and morbidity rates and health disparities for certain racial, ethnic, and regional 
rural population groups are substantially increased over those of the general rural population.26 A 
FIGURE 8.2 Age-adjusted death rates among persons of all ages for fi ve leading causes of 
death in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan areas,* by year.
*Nonmetropolitan and metropolitan areas were identified using the Office of Management and Budget’s 2013 county-
based classification scheme.
Source: From Moy E, Macarena CG, Bastian B, et al. Leading causes of death in nonmetropolitan and metropol-
itan areas—United States, 1999–2014. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2017;66(6):1–8. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
volumes/66/ss/ss6601a1.htm
0
1999
50
100
150
200
250
Nonmetropolitan
Year
Cancer
Rate per 100,000 population
300
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Metropolitan
(B)
0
1999
50
100
150
200
250
Nonmetropolitan
Year
Heart disease
Rate per 100,000 population
300
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Metropolitan
(A)
(C)
Year
0
1999
25
50
75
Nonmetropolitan
Unintentional injury
Rate per 100,000 population
100
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Metropolitan
(D)
Year
0
1999
25
50
75
Nonmetropolitan
Chronic lower respiratory disease
Rate per 100,000 population
100
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Metropolitan
(E)
0
1999
25
50
75
Nonmetropolitan
Year
Stroke
Rate per 100,000 population
100
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Metropolitan


===PAGE 198===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
173
report prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 2014 found that American 
Indian and Alaska Native death rates were nearly 50% higher than those of non-Hispanic 
Whites, with the highest American Indian death rates occurring in the largely rural Northern 
and Southern Plains.46 In North Carolina, a state with the highest population of American 
Indians east of the Mississippi, health outcomes for American Indians are signifi cantly worse 
than those for Whites.47 Research indicates that mortality rates for rural African Americans 
are substantially higher than those for rural Whites.26 In the Mississippi Delta, a region with 
many rural counties and a large African American population, the maternal mortality rate is 
signifi cantly higher than in non-Delta states (18.5/100,000 births vs. 13.6/100,000 births, respec-
tively).48 Compared to non-Hispanic rural Whites, rural Hispanic populations report higher 
rates of “fair” or “poor” health.49 Between 2009 and 2013, the infant mortality rate in Appalachia 
was 16% higher than the nationwide rate.50
Rurality and Mortality
Potentially excess deaths (PEDs) are considered to be those deaths among persons younger than 
80 years of age that exceed the number that would be expected for persons of the same ages liv-
ing in benchmark states, defi ned as the three states with the lowest death rates for the condition 
of interest.36 For each specifi ed condition, the mean death rate in each of the three benchmark 
states is averaged to determine a single comparison rate for calculating PEDs. Five leading causes 
of death have been identifi ed based on the International Classifi cation of Diseases, 10th Revision 
(ICD-10), including heart disease, cancer, unintentional injuries, chronic lower respiratory dis-
ease, and stroke.36,51
When the fi ve leading causes of death in the United States are considered during the years 
1999–2014, age-adjusted PED rates are higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in metropolitan 
areas.36 While mortality rate for heart disease, cancer, and stroke declined for both nonmetro-
politan and metropolitan residents during that time period, the decline for heart disease and 
cancer was slower for nonmetropolitan residents. PEDs from chronic lower respiratory disease 
increased in nonmetropolitan areas while decreasing in metropolitan areas (54.3% vs. 30.9% 
PEDs).36 Unintentional injury PEDs were substantially higher in nonmetropolitan than met-
ropolitan areas during most of the period from 1999 to 2014 (57.5% vs. 39.2%, respectively).36 
PEDs from all of the fi ve leading causes were greater in nonmetropolitan than metropolitan areas. 
Other causes of death resulting in higher mortality rates for rural areas include diabetes, lung 
cancer, kidney disease, suicide, infl uenza, pneumonia, cirrhosis of the liver, Alzheimer’s disease, 
and drug overdose.36
Of the fi ve leading causes of death, three—heart disease, cancer, and stroke—are highly asso-
ciated with nutrition factors that impact both prevention and treatment. Patients suff ering from 
chronic lower respiratory disease—oft en caused or exacerbated by smoking—may experience 
signifi cant nutrition diffi  culties, which require medical nutrition therapy provided by a nutrition 
professional.52 Th us, four of the fi ve leading causes of death have strong implications for PHN 
practitioners.
Substance Abuse in Rural America
Rural residents may be at increased risk for abuse of substances including alcohol, tobacco, and 
drugs.53 Remote rural residents admitted to substance abuse treatment facilities were more likely 
to report their principal drug of abuse as alcohol (49.5%), marijuana (20.9%), and non-heroin opi-
ates, while in large urban areas the primary drugs of abuse were alcohol (36.1%), heroin (21.8%), 


===PAGE 199===
174 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
and marijuana (17.0%).54 Research comparing rural and urban substance abuse statistics is oft en 
confounded by which rural/urban defi nitions are used, as well as other important factors such as 
race and ethnicity, cultural infl uences, degree of religiosity, familial relationships and social net-
works, economic and fi nancial factors, and enforcement of applicable laws and regulations. Data 
from 2016 indicate that rates of abuse for specifi c substances vary among nonmetro, small metro, 
and large metro areas.89 For example, rates of opioid abuse were 4.0% and 4.5% for nonmetro and 
large metro areas, respectively.89 Rural residents typically have less access than urban residents to 
substance abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery services, thus making substance abuse more 
problematic even if rates of substance abuse are lower.
Prescription Opioid Abuse
Th e National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) reports that the leading cause of death by injury 
in the United States is poisoning, and that the largest proportion of poison deaths are associated 
with illegal drugs and pharmaceutical drugs including opioids.55 States with large rural popula-
tions have experienced comparatively greater numbers of deaths and injuries from drug poison-
ing; examples include the states of West Virginia, Kentucky, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, Utah, 
Wyoming, New Mexico, Arizona, and Alaska.56 Public health professionals have indicated that 
drug poisoning deaths are concentrated in areas with large numbers of rural residents.56 Higher 
proportional numbers of drug-related deaths per capita in rural areas may be related to longer 
fi rst-responder response times, as well as the possibility that continuing education opportunities 
in regard to drug overdose treatment may be less available in rural settings.53
Th e PHN practitioner should maintain awareness that substance abuse issues can impact the 
nutrition status of rural populations in a variety of ways. On an individual level, substance abuse 
may result in a variety of nutrition problems. Macro- and micronutrient defi ciencies may become 
serious and even life-threatening, and are oft en exacerbated by the secondary eff ects of drug and 
alcohol abuse such as drug–nutrient interactions.57 Overt malnutrition can result from displace-
ment of nutritious foods by substances including drugs and alcohol. Opioid-induced bowel dys-
function, most oft en manifesting as severe constipation, is a frequent side eff ect of opioid use even 
in opioid users supervised by physicians and can have a substantial adverse eff ect on health and 
quality of life.58 On a population level, substance abuse can lead to situations in which appropri-
ate nutrition behaviors are de-emphasized because seeking the substance becomes a primary life 
priority. Th us, levels of food insecurity for both the aff ected individual and that person’s family 
may be exacerbated when personal and family resources are used to obtain substances rather than 
food, with subsequent negative impacts on both individual and family health.57
Rural Food Security
Th e USDA ERS has provided defi nitions of levels of food security.59 Table 8.2 provides a descrip-
tion of each offi  cially defi ned category. Th e USDA ERS reported in 2015 that 84.6% of rural 
households were food secure compared with 87.8% of metropolitan households, using OMB 
metropolitan/nonmetropolitan designations.60 For nonmetropolitan households, 15.4% were 
food insecure, with 6.1% reporting very low food security. Rates of overall low food security 
and very low food security for metropolitan residents were 12.2% and 4.9%, respectively. When 
households with children were considered separately, the overall rates of low food security were 
20.5% for nonmetropolitan areas and 15.9% for metropolitan areas.
Poverty is a key indicator of risk for low food security.61 In rural areas with struggling econ-
omies, opportunities for employment suffi  cient to support an individual’s or family’s needs may 


===PAGE 200===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
175
be scarce or unavailable. Low food security is exacerbated by food-access issues. Availability 
of adequate, safe, and healthful food may be decreased by the loss of local full-service grocery 
stores in rural areas; the USDA ERS reported that between 2007 and 2011, nonmetropolitan 
counties lost an average of 5.77% of their total number of full-service grocery stores.62 Lack of 
infrastructure for public transportation and/or inability to access private transportation for 
travel to grocery stores may contribute to higher rates of low food security in rural populations. 
Food pantries, usually nongovernmental community organizations, which provide emergency 
food assistance to food-insecure populations, may be less available and accessible to rural 
residents. In the past two decades, convenience stores, including several convenience store 
chains, have made a concerted eff ort to locate in rural communities and food deserts.63 Some 
analysts have expressed concern regarding the impact of convenience stores on existing local 
businesses. Alongside these concerns, it is acknowledged that convenience stores have brought 
an expanded selection of foods to rural areas, including some low-fat dairy products, canned 
and frozen fruits and vegetables, and whole-grain breads and cereals. Few convenience stores 
off er fresh produce.63
Associations Between Low Food Security and Adverse Health Outcomes
Low food security has been linked with higher risk for a number of poor health outcomes.64,65 
Conditions for which low food security is a risk factor include but are not limited to:
 
■
Poor cardiovascular outcomes including hypertension and peripheral arterial disease64
 
■
Diabetes65
 
■
Chronic kidney disease66
 
■
Depression in mothers and behavioral diffi  culties in preschoolers67
 
■
Self-reported fair or poor health, asthma, weight gain, poor academic performance, 
and social diffi  culties in children68
TABLE 8.2 USDA LEVELS OF FOOD SECURITY
LEVEL
DEFINITION
FOOD SECURITY
High food security
No reported indications of food-access problems or limitations.
Marginal food security
One or two reported indications—typically of anxiety over food suffi -
ciency or shortage of food in the house. Little or no indication of changes 
in diets or food intake.
FOOD INSECURITY
Low food security
Reports of reduced quality, variety, or desirability of diet. Little or no 
indication of reduced food intake.
Very low food security
Reports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and reduced 
food intake.
USDA, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Source: From U.S. Department of Agriculture. Defi nitions of Food Security. 2016. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/
food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/defi nitions-of-food-security


===PAGE 201===
176 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
 
■
Self-reported fair to poor general and mental health, worse academic performance, 
and compromised dietary intake in university students69
 
■
Poor cognitive function, impaired ability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs), 
increased depressive symptoms, and malnutrition in older adults70
Evidence exists to indicate that marginal food security, while not considered low food security, 
may also be associated with poor outcomes and should be addressed when working with clients.64
Because low food security is associated with a plethora of poor health outcomes, the PHN 
practitioner should assess the food security level of clients and populations and should implement 
appropriate nutrition education and food-access interventions to improve food security and to 
link clients/populations with food resources.
CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTH PROFESSIONALS WHO PRACTICE 
IN RURAL SETTINGS
Healthcare professionals who choose to build careers in rural settings oft en report that rural prac-
tice is rich in opportunity, fulfi lling, and rewarding.71 Positive aspects of rural health practice 
include opportunities to get to know patients well over time, to pursue a generalist practice in 
which one is able to utilize and develop many skills, and to enjoy the feeling of fulfi llment that 
comes from making a positive contribution to the lives of others. Successful rural practice requires 
autonomy and independence, and persons who enjoy these challenges may thrive. Practitioners 
also mention quality-of-life advantages: freedom from daily commutes in heavy traffi  c, less pol-
lution, lower levels of concern regarding crime rates and personal safety, lower costs of living and 
greater home aff ordability, a slower pace of life, and perhaps beautiful—even spectacular—nat-
ural surroundings.71 Financial incentives, such as grant monies, state and national funding, and 
other sources of support are available to some rural providers for repayment of student loans and/
or practice start-up costs and maintenance subsidies.72 Salaries for health providers are not always 
lower in rural areas: in some locations, the economic law of “supply and demand” may result in 
sign-on bonuses, generous remuneration, and other incentives such as education benefi ts and 
support for practice expenses.
Despite the positive aspects of rural practice, however, recruitment of health professionals to 
rural settings remains challenging.73 Financial opportunities in some rural areas may be inade-
quate for the repayment of the substantial student loans incurred by new practitioners. Amenities, 
equipment, and facilities to support and enhance practice may be lacking. Employment for an 
accompanying spouse or partner may be diffi  cult to obtain. Geographic isolation and lack of 
opportunities to interact with other professionals are challenging. If a practitioner is the only pro-
vider in a geographic area, demands for on-call coverage may become problematic. Certain quali-
ty-of-life issues can also become barriers to rural practice and may prompt decisions to leave rural 
settings for relocation to an urban area.73 Practitioners may be impacted by poor access to cultural, 
entertainment, and educational opportunities for oneself and one’s family, scarcity of important 
services including quality childcare and excellent schools, lack of adequate shopping resources, 
and the time and distance required to commute to metropolitan areas to access desired services.
Best Practices for Recruiting Rural Practitioners
A small body of research regarding the recruitment and retention of rural physicians, physi-
cian assistants, and nurses provides guidelines for increasing the number of health professionals 


===PAGE 202===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
177
entering rural practice.72,74,75 Th e literature currently provides context and background for inter-
ventions designed to augment the workforce of rural practitioners from other specialties such as 
nutrition and dietetics, public health nutrition, physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech/
language therapy, social work, and mental health providers.
Practices such as modifying medical school admission practices by moving from a score-fo-
cused admission process to a mission-focused admission process may help to increase the num-
ber of rural health practitioners.74,76 In other words, if a state or region identifi es a need to prepare 
more students to enter rural health practice, careful identifi cation of students who have a strong 
desire to work in rural areas may be a best practice for achieving desired rural workforce goals. 
Research fi ndings suggest that rural upbringing and receiving hands-on training in rural health 
settings are positively associated with physician choice to practice in a rural setting.77 Best prac-
tices for recruiting physicians, and by inference other practitioners including PHN practitioners, 
to rural areas may include (a) identifying appropriate students, as early as high school age, who 
want to build their lives and careers in rural settings; (b) keeping those students in-state for their 
entire education and arranging their practicum experiences in rural health settings; (c) provid-
ing seamless support throughout the education process from high school through professional 
education and credentialing; and (d) providing incentives, including fi nancial incentives, to build 
practices in rural areas and to remain in those areas.78–81
Settings for Rural Practice
Rural nutrition practitioners work in a variety of settings. Settings include but are not lim-
ited to rural hospitals and nursing homes; health departments including local/county Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) programs and food 
assistance programs; nonprofi t agencies; public schools; federal, state, and regional administra-
tions; and other organizations.
Two nutrition practice settings of special importance in rural areas are Rural Health Clinics 
(RHCs) or Federally Qualifi ed Health Centers (FQHCs). Both RHCs and FQHCs provide 
expanded opportunities for underserved and low-income rural residents to access healthcare 
services.82 RHCs and FQHCs are important settings for nutrition care, because both types of 
organizations are able to bill Medicare and Medicaid for diabetes self-management training and 
medical nutrition therapy.83 In addition, funding requirements for FQHCs include the provision 
of wraparound services to address social determinants—including nutrition determinants—of 
health. Table 8.3 provides a side-by-side comparison of RHC and FQHC characteristics.
Distinctives of Rural Practice
Several unique factors may aff ect rural health practitioners, including rural PHN practitioners. 
Th ese include privacy concerns, dual relationships, the need to attain both generalist and spe-
cialist skills, and the need to maintain professional competence and linkages with colleagues.
In sparsely populated rural areas in which extensive kinship networks, long-term friendships 
and animosities, and shared history result in situations in which many people who live in close 
proximity know each other well, appropriate legal and personal privacy boundaries can be diffi  cult 
to maintain.84 Situations such as well-meant but public sharing of prayer requests at faith-based 
community organizations and a neighbor recognizing a parked car outside a practitioner offi  ce 
can result in privacy concerns. Attempts to curtail local practices may be viewed by community 
residents as “outsiders” imposing unwanted control over community customs.84 Some investiga-
tors have found heightened stigma in rural areas surrounding specifi c health conditions.30 PHN 


===PAGE 203===
178 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
practitioners who work in rural areas should be vigilant in regard to maintaining all appropri-
ate legal and ethical privacy boundaries. Examples of situations in which privacy becomes para-
mount include protecting the privacy of clients seeking nutrition advice or public food assistance.
Dual relationships occur when there is a “blurring” of professional boundaries because of 
social relationships.78,84 A PHN practitioner working in a rural setting is very likely to encounter 
clients in community social settings such as children’s school gatherings, local sports events, and 
community venues such as churches and government agencies. In rural settings, strict prohibition 
of dual relationships may be counterproductive, since the development of local relationships and 
a presence in the community are necessary for eff ective practice. A proactive approach to dual 
relationships may be helpful.78 Th at is, during professional encounters, clients can be told that in 
a social situation, the practitioner will not refer to any previous professional interaction unless 
the client initiates the discussion, and even then, the practitioner will not engage in conversation 
in situations in which privacy cannot be maintained. Practitioners may also fi nd it helpful to 
TABLE 8.3 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN RHCs AND FQHCs
RHCs
FQHCs
For-profi t or nonprofi t
Nonprofi t or public facility
May be limited to a specifi c type of primary 
care practice (e.g., OB/GYN, pediatrics)
Required to provide care for all age groups
Not required to have a board of directors
Required to have a board of directors; at least 51% 
must be patients of the health center
No minimum service requirements
Minimum service required; maternity and prenatal 
care, preventive care, behavioral health, dental health, 
emergency care, and pharmaceutical services
Not required to charge based on a sliding 
fee scale
Required to treat all residents in their service area with 
charges based on a sliding fee scale
Not required to provide a minimum of hours 
or emergency coverage
Required to be open 32.5 hours a week for FTCA 
coverage of licensed or certifi ed healthcare providers; 
must provide emergency service after business hours 
either on-site or by arrangement with another health-
care provider
Required to conduct an annual program eval-
uation regarding quality improvement
Required to have an ongoing quality assurance 
program
Must be located in a Health Professional 
Shortage Area, Medically Underserved Area, 
or governor-designated and secretary-certi-
fi ed shortage area; may retain RHC status if 
designation of service area changes
Must be located in an area that is underserved or 
experiencing a shortage of healthcare providers
RHCs must operate in nonurbanized areas
FQHCs may operate in both nonurbanized and urban-
ized areas
Required to submit an annual cost report; 
however, auditing of fi nancial reports is not 
required
Required to submit an annual cost report and audited 
fi nancial reports
FQHCs, Federally Qualifi ed Health Centers; FTCA, Federal Tort Claims Act; RHCs, Rural Health Clinics.
Source: From Rural Health Information Hub. Rural Health Clinics (RHCs). 2019. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/topics/
rural-health-clinics


===PAGE 204===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
179
develop a pre-prepared answer, or script, for occasions when an inappropriate question may be 
asked in a social setting. For example, if asked to provide information about a particular client, 
the practitioner may be prepared to reply, “Federal privacy laws prevent me from talking about 
who does or doesn’t visit my facility.” A benefi cial outcome of such a pre-prepared answer is that 
trust is built as community residents realize that privacy is respected and taken seriously by the 
PHN practitioner.
Rural practitioners need both generalist and specialist skills. For example, rural nurses primar-
ily act as generalists, providing care to patients with a variety of common conditions. However, 
rural nurses also need specialist training in advanced life support skills, needed when preparing 
severely injured or critically ill patients for transport to higher level facilities. In the same way, 
rural PHN practitioners need strong generalist knowledge in basic nutrition, nutrition education 
skills, and nutrition intervention strategies and evaluation, while also acquiring specialist-level 
knowledge in rural health topics.
Continuing education may be a challenge for rural PHN practitioners. Financial resources may 
be lacking to provide access to education programs and associated expenses such as tuition and 
travel. Lack of infrastructure such as broadband Internet access may also impact practitioners’ 
ability to access web-based educational programs. Some rural facilities have been successful in 
obtaining grant funding, education sponsorships, and other resources to support staff  education. 
Distance education strategies for continuing education for rural practitioners show promise in 
areas where Internet access is available.79 Rural facilities may partner with other healthcare orga-
nizations and groups to provide continuing education, thus increasing resources for training and 
continuing education.90 PHN practitioners should take responsibility for identifying resources 
and obtaining adequate continuing education to keep knowledge and skills up to date.
CULTURAL COMPETENCE IN RURAL HEALTH SETTINGS 
IN THE UNITED STATES
Th ere is no one recognized defi nition of cultural competence.80 According to the National Center 
for Cultural Competence (NCCC), although there are a number of useful defi nitions of “cultural 
competence,” the work of Cross et al. in 1989 provided the groundwork for defi ning the term and 
has remained the basis for the discipline’s fundamental principles since that time. According to 
Cross et al., cultural competence is
a set of congruent behaviors, attitudes, and policies that come together in a system, agency, 
or among professionals and enable that system, agency, or those professionals to work eff ec-
tively in cross-cultural situations.84
Cross et al. go on to defi ne “culture” as
the integrated pattern of human behavior that includes thoughts, communications, actions, 
customs, beliefs, values, and institutions of a racial, ethnic, religious, or social group.84
“Competence” is described as
the capacity to function eff ectively.84
Th us, a culturally competent public health nutritionist is one who functions eff ectively within a 
diverse variety of professional and community settings to plan, implement, and evaluate respect-
ful, culturally appropriate interventions, which are delivered alongside and in alignment with the 
target population’s distinctive customs, beliefs, and values.


===PAGE 205===
180 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Applications of Cultural Competence Skills in Rural Settings
Respectful care delivery in rural settings requires that the PHN practitioner perform self- 
assessment of one’s cultural awareness in regard to populations served. As an example, consider 
the culture of southern Appalachia, which resulted from the mingling of many groups of people 
including but not limited to the original American Indian inhabitants, enslaved persons from 
Africa transported to North America against their will, Scots-Irish settlers who traveled from 
Europe to the Appalachian mountains before America’s War for Independence, and more recent 
newcomers who have immigrated from an array of nations.85 Despite this broad diversity, familiar 
pejoratives such as “hillbillies” and “rednecks” are still used to refer to entire groups of south-
ern Appalachian people.86 Similar pejoratives have been applied to many other rural population 
groups around the nation.
Stereotypes are inaccurate and unhelpful because all rural populations are composed of diverse 
groups of individuals that defy simple categorization and description.5 Th e PHN practitioner 
should not apply cultural generalizations to any particular person. Rather, within a given cultural 
context, practitioners should respectfully get to know people as individuals.
Stereotypes not only perpetuate harmful myths but impair professionals’ ability to provide 
eff ective health interventions to rural communities.87 When initially entering a rural area, it is 
important for PHN practitioners to take adequate time to observe, listen, and learn about local 
customs, history, cultural distinctives, and social norms and expectations in all their variety and 
diversity.87 PHN practitioners should not underestimate the amount of time needed to develop 
productive, trusting relationships. A sense of humility and a true willingness to listen carefully to 
residents will likely be productive in nurturing community connections.
It is essential to gain a thorough understanding of a particular rural culture prior to imple-
menting public health nutrition interventions within that culture. Focusing on the development 
of relationships with key individuals who can provide consultation and advice regarding spe-
cifi c interventions can be of great help in preventing unintended missteps, especially for entry-
level professionals. Th e PHN practitioner should work to build trust, mutual understanding, 
and partnerships within the local community. In some rural cultures, people who are “not from 
around here” will be considered outsiders. Nutrition interventions that are developed in part-
nership with participatory community members, culturally sensitive, aligned with community 
values and initiatives, and embedded within existing community frameworks are most likely to 
be eff ective.91
CULTURALLY COMPETENT PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION 
INTERVENTIONS IN THE RURAL UNITED STATES: 
AN INTERPROFESSIONAL APPROACH
The Rural Health Nutrition Practice Model
Th e RHNPM was developed by Gutschall and Th ompson as a result of qualitative research involv-
ing the coding of in-depth interviews with rural southern Appalachian residents and nutrition 
practitioners located in the mountainous regions of northwestern North Carolina.88 Th e pur-
pose of the RHNPM is to provide an interprofessional framework for developing eff ective nutri-
tion interventions for specifi c rural populations. Preliminary fi ndings have suggested that the 
RHNPM may be applicable to rural populations from areas other than Appalachia.
Th e RHNPM describes four broad themes, which emerged from coded interviews with rural 
residents and rural nutrition practitioners in an Appalachian population. Each theme, along with 


===PAGE 206===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
181
FIGURE 8.3 Rural Health Nutrition Practice Model based on qualitative analysis of interviews 
with residents and nutrition practitioners from rural Appalachia.
Source: From Gutschall M, Thompson KL. Addressing health disparities in rural nutrition practice: a qualitative model 
from rural Appalachia. J Hunger Environ Nutr. 2017;13(1):84–89.
1. Access and
resources
3. Traditional
foods
2. Sociocultural
characteristics
4. Health
behaviors
Finances
Lack of insurance
Location/distance to care
Food insecurity
Resistance to change
Religion
Family
Storytelling
Familiar foods
Dietary patterns and
Pathways
Family meals
Attitudes toward
preventive care
Substance abuse
Attitudes toward self-
management
Chronic disease
respective selected subthemes, is represented in Figure 8.3. Access and resources refers to the popu-
lation’s ability to access food and nutrition resources as well as the adequacy of available resources. 
Sociocultural characteristics are those culturally related traits, attitudes, beliefs, and practices that 
may tend to be descriptive of a particular population, although practitioners should always avoid 
overgeneralizations when working with individuals. Traditional foods are particular foods and 
eating patterns that are important within a particular region and/or population; these may be 
historical or current foods and eating patterns. Health behaviors are common health practices and 
health beliefs that may impact nutritional well-being and overall health outcomes. Figure 8.4 pro-
vides a working example of a PHN intervention implemented within a rural Appalachian context.
PHN practitioners may use the RHNPM to develop culturally appropriate interventions for 
specifi c populations. Within the four broad themes, PHN practitioners should substitute subthemes 
based on their specifi c rural populations served. Identifi cation of population-specifi c subthemes 
can be accomplished through a systematic information-gathering and organizing process, as 
described in the following:
 
■
Conduct focus groups or interviews and/or survey the population served. Structure 
information-gathering tools and sessions to focus on the four broad areas of access and 
resources, sociocultural characteristics, traditional foods, and health behaviors.


===PAGE 207===
182 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
 
■
Based on the results of information gathering, organize responses within the four 
broad categories.
 
■
Identify common themes within the responses under each category.
 
■
Summarize and arrange the common themes under each category using the RHNPM 
worksheet.
FIGURE 8.4 Intervention example based on Rural Health Nutrition Practice Model, among a 
rural Appalachian population, with IP suggestions
IP, interprofessional practice; PHN, public health nutrition; SNAP, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
Source: From Gutschall M, Thompson KL. Addressing health disparities in rural nutrition practice: a qualitative model 
from rural Appalachia. J Hunger Environ Nutr. 2017;13(1):84–89.
1. Access and
resources
3. Traditional
foods
2. Sociocultural
characteristics
4. Health
behaviors
Theme: Preventive Care
Nutrition education
focus: A healthful diet
helps prevent chronic
disease and helps
preserve the ability to
care for one’s self and
one’s family
IP focus: Physician, Nurse,
or Nurse practitioner
Theme: storytelling,
maternal food
Gatekeeper
Nutrition education
materials are based on a
story: “Ms. J Prepares
family meals for the
week”
IP focus: PHN practitioner
Theme: Familiar foods
Nutrition education
focus: Meal plan and
recipes based on familiar,
low-cost, easily accessed
foods; basic cooking skills
IP focus: PHN
practitioner; for some
rural populations (older
adults, differently abled
persons) occupational
therapist re: cooking
skills
Theme: Food insecurity
Nutrition education focus:
Preparing healthful, low-cost
meals for one week using
easily available foods; access
to healthful foods (SNAP)
IP focus: Social worker


===PAGE 208===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
183
Using the RHNPM to Optimize Interprofessional Collaborations
Figure 8.4 provides suggestions for interprofessional collaborations within each of the four broad 
categories of a specifi c rural public health nutrition intervention. When utilizing the RHNPM, 
the public health practitioner should recall that interventions may be enhanced through appro-
priate interprofessional collaborations. Interprofessional involvement in interventions may be 
through direct participation, or of a consultative nature. Health professionals who are commonly 
found working in rural health settings include physicians, physician assistants, nurses and nurse 
practitioners, mental health professionals including school counselors, registered dietitian nutri-
tionists, WIC nutritionists, social workers, public health professionals, physical and occupational 
therapists, respiratory therapists, and others. Th e roles of each discipline should be considered 
carefully, and appropriate collaboration/participation should be considered when planning pub-
lic health nutrition interventions. Collaboration may not be necessary for every intervention or 
every step of a particular intervention; however, the process of thinking through the need for 
interprofessional participation will strengthen the fi nal intervention whether or not other profes-
sionals are utilized.
CONTINUING YOUR LEARNING
Th e rural PHN practitioner should develop a personal plan for continued learning and skill 
development to support competent practice. Such a plan may include self-assessment of knowl-
edge, skills, and professionalism, along with plans to address identifi ed areas for further develop-
ment. A number of resources and organizations have focused on rural health, and an abundance 
of data for study and use is available from federal, state, regional, and local sources. Oft en the 
Rural Health Information Hub (the Hub; www.ruralhealthinfo.org) is an excellent place to start 
when researching rural health topics because the Hub serves as a national clearinghouse for 
rural health information. In addition to providing both breadth and depth of information, the 
Hub provides many links to additional information. State offi  ces of rural health can be excellent 
resources for further learning about rural health. A list of resources for learning more about 
rural health and rural nutrition practice is provided later in this chapter under Continue Your 
Learning Resources.
CONCLUSION
Rural health settings off er many strengths and assets that can be leveraged in improving health 
outcomes for residents as well as specifi c challenges for the PHN practitioner. A career in rural 
PHN off ers the potential for personal fulfi llment while impacting many lives for the better. For 
PHN practitioners who enjoy practicing with autonomy, developing productive helping relation-
ships with clients over time, cultivating both breadth and depth of professional skills, and enjoy-
ing the advantages off ered by a rural lifestyle, a career in rural PHN may be an excellent fi t.
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Th ere is no one defi nition of the term “rural.” Rural populations and regions are 
diverse and constantly changing. Th ree federal defi nitions of the term are most oft en 
used by public health practitioners: the USCB defi nition, the OMB defi nition, and 
the USDA ERS defi nition of RUCCs and RUCA codes. Th e federal defi nitions are 


===PAGE 209===
184 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
defi nitions of exclusion: that is, “urban” is defi ned, and whatever is not urban is rural. 
Th e PHN practitioner, when seeking to implement programs and obtain funding for 
rural programs, should use an appropriate defi nition for the purpose intended.
2. 
Rural populations, in regard to health and nutrition care, may face problems and barri-
ers diff erent from those encountered by urban residents.
3a. Rural areas display many strengths and assets that can be leveraged to address com-
munity and regional challenges. While rural areas do indeed face health disparities, 
they can also demonstrate extensive social capital, social networks, close connections 
among cross-sector partners, and high levels of creativity in addressing challenges.
3b. An understanding of access, quality, and equity issues is central to eff ective public 
health nutrition practice in rural areas. Th e PHN practitioner should seek to identify 
and defi ne specifi c access, quality, and equity issues that may create health disparities 
for the population served.
4a. Rates of potentially excessive deaths from the fi ve leading causes of death in America 
are higher for rural than for urban populations. Th e fi ve leading causes of death 
include heart disease, cancer, unintentional injury, chronic lower respiratory disease, 
and stroke. Of the fi ve leading causes of death in rural America, three have direct 
associations with nutrition, and nutrition therapy is important in the treatment of the 
remaining two causes.
4b. PHN practitioners should be aware that substance abuse is an issue in both rural and 
urban settings. Th e PHN practitioner should assess target populations for rates of sub-
stance abuse in regard to its impacts on nutrition-related choices and behaviors.
4c. Rural areas tend to have proportionately higher numbers of persons experiencing low 
food security. Because low food security is associated with a variety of poor health 
outcomes, the PHN practitioner should assess the food security level of clients and 
populations and should implement appropriate interventions to improve food security 
and to link clients/populations with food resources.
5. 
Rural health practitioners choose to practice in rural areas for a variety of reasons. At 
the same time, barriers to rural practice are signifi cant and have resulted in a prepon-
derance of HPSAs in nonmetropolitan counties. Persons who were raised in rural 
areas are more likely to return to rural areas to practice health careers. Barriers to rural 
practice should be addressed, and PHN practitioners should be provided with train-
ing and education specifi c to common rural issues encountered in practice. Common 
issues for practitioners may include privacy, dual relationships, the need to develop 
both generalist and specialist skills, and maintaining competence through continuing 
education and linkages with colleagues.
6. 
Cultural competence is necessary when working with rural populations. Th e PHN 
practitioner should seek to be culturally competent, defi ned as a practitioner who 
functions eff ectively within a diverse variety of professional and community settings 
to plan, implement, and evaluate respectful, culturally appropriate interventions, 
which are delivered alongside and in alignment with the target population’s distinctive 
customs, beliefs, and values. Rural is not homogeneous; rural areas encompass great 
diversity in terms of race/ethnicity, prominent employment sectors, and regional cul-
ture and norms. Culturally competent practitioners approach rural populations with 
humility and a true desire to learn about their unique community experiences.


===PAGE 210===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
185
7. 
Eff ective rural public health nutrition interventions utilize a framework that incor-
porates the specifi c target population’s available resources and ability to access 
resources, sociocultural characteristics including sociocultural determinants of 
health status, traditional foods including cultural and historical dietary patterns, and 
health beliefs and behaviors including cultural defi nitions of health, self-management 
practices, attitudes toward preventive care, and incidence and risk of chronic dis-
ease. Sociocultural characteristics and geographic obstacles associated with rurality, 
reliance on customary food patterns, and adherence to certain culturally based health 
behaviors may contribute to poor health outcomes. Th e PHN practitioner should use 
an appropriate theoretical framework for planning eff ective nutrition interventions 
for rural populations.
8. 
Eff ective public health nutrition interventions utilize a framework that integrates the 
skills of the interprofessional healthcare team in order to enhance client outcomes.
9. 
Th e PHN practitioner who works in a rural area should develop a personal 
 development plan to maintain and improve both general and setting-focused prac-
tice skills.
CASE STUDY: A RURAL FOOD PANTRY CLIENT: HELPING A 
SINGLE MOTHER INCREASE THE NUTRITIONAL QUALITY 
OF MEALS PREPARED AT HOME
In a highly rural Midwestern state, an active food pantry Food for All (FFA) operates in con-
junction with a soup kitchen, homeless shelter, free medical clinic, and free pharmacy. Services 
are funded by a community nonprofi t agency, which is supported by grant funding, donations, 
a regional food bank, and a number of local volunteers who provide many hours of free labor 
and services. FFA has worked hard to develop positive, collaborative relationships with local and 
county religious communities, which provide donations of money, food, and volunteer assistance. 
Th e organization’s mission, strongly emphasized by its director and governing board, is to (a) 
provide essential food assistance to county residents, (b) address root causes of hunger, and (c) 
educate clients and the wider community on hunger-related issues. FFA works hard to promote 
independence and self-effi  cacy among its client base.
Research has demonstrated that nutrition education promotes self-effi  cacy and reduces food 
insecurity scores (measured using the USDA food insecurity scale). FFA has partnered with a 
nutrition and dietetics department in a college in an adjoining county to make individualized 
basic nutrition education available to its clients. Under the supervision of licensed dietitians, 
advanced nutrition students are now meeting with selected clients for one-on-one nutrition 
education appointments. Th e appointments include training in regard to basic nutrition using 
materials online (www.choosemyplate.gov), menu planning, optimization of food resources, and 
cooking skills. Individual nutrition counseling appointments will also include instruction in the 
use of FFA’s new food distribution system, the FFA Fresh Market. Th e self-select Fresh Market 
model is arranged to appear as a grocery store so that food pantry clients can browse and self-se-
lect available food items. Th e market is arranged to emphasize fresh fruits and vegetables, whole 
grains, and other healthful foods. Signage throughout the market is easily readable and provides 
guidelines for food selections.
Ms. J, a single mother of three children, works full time in her rural county and does not 
have health insurance. Ms. J and her family qualify for $361.00 in Supplemental Nutrition 


===PAGE 211===
186 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) benefi ts monthly, and her children are insured through her state’s 
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). Ms. J’s monthly income aft er deductions is about 
$1,850, and her housing expenses including utilities consume about 60% of that amount. Th e 
remaining funds provide her with less than $200 per week to cover all other expenses. Th us, 
SNAP benefi ts are a vital lifeline to nutritious food for Ms. J and her family. Ms. J does have a 
small kitchen with a stove and refrigerator in good working order, and she enjoys cooking when 
she has time.
Although Ms. J utilizes the FFA, she also takes advantage of a food pantry operated by a local 
church when emergency expenses cut into the food budget. Ms. J was recently off ered a promo-
tion. Th e off er has placed her in the diffi  cult situation of having to worry if the modest increase 
in income would result in the loss of some of her SNAP benefi ts and her children’s health insur-
ance, which would ultimately decrease her ability to feed her family. Ms. J is very interested in 
providing her children with nutritious, healthy meals. She has recently arranged to meet with the 
Fresh Market nutrition student to help her increase the nutritional quality of meals she prepares 
at home and to provide some healthful, low-cost recipes.
Case Study Questions
For this case study, assume that you are an advanced nutrition student who will be meeting with 
Ms. J. Answer the following questions:
1. How might you assess Ms. J’s current nutrition knowledge?
2. Research indicates that nutrition education can help to reduce food insecurity. What 
do you think could be the reasons for this?
3. What rural associated factors infl uence Ms. J’s access to food?
4. What barriers do you foresee Ms. J facing in terms of feeding her family?
5. Ms. J has been working at her present job for 4 years and has been asked if she is inter-
ested in assuming a management position. Although enticing, she is afraid of losing 
her SNAP benefi ts and the children’s health insurance if she earns more money. A 
promotion, she worries, might actually decrease her ability to feed her family once her 
current benefi ts are reduced. Which member of the interprofessional team could be 
most helpful to Ms. J in discussing her options as well as the impact of the promotion 
on her current SNAP benefi ts?
6. What nutrition and food resources does Ms. J have available to her at this time?
7. What would be important considerations in selecting appropriate recipes for a rural, 
low-income client? Select an appropriate recipe and provide it. Why is your chosen 
recipe appropriate for Ms. J?
8. Which topics (three to fi ve maximum) will you plan to cover during your 45-minute 
appointment with Ms. J? Why have you chosen each topic?
9. How will you help Ms. J learn to use the new Fresh Market?
10. What resources will you recommend to Ms. J for continued learning? Are there any 
barriers you will need to consider when recommending resources? How will you fol-
low up with Ms. J?


===PAGE 212===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
187
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. Based on the USDA ERS defi nition of RUCCs, how is your county of residence 
designated? Now look at RUCCs for your state. Which are your state’s most urban 
counties? Which are the most rural? Do you agree with these designations, and why 
or why not?
2. 
For each of the following situations, describe your reasoning regarding the choice of a 
defi nition of “rural” to use in applying for grant funding:
a. 
Commuting practices of nurses and dietitians who work at a rural county health 
department providing primary care and WIC services, respectively
b. Impact of a proposed regional airport on productive farmland in a rural county
c. 
Access to food resources such as full-service grocery stores in a metropolitan or 
micropolitan area
3. Research national, state, or regional databases to fi nd rates for substance abuse, includ-
ing misuse of alcohol, tobacco, and prescription or recreational drugs in your county 
or region. How might your fi ndings impact nutrition-related choices and behaviors of 
residents? Compare rates for an urban and rural county in your region or state. How 
might you explain your fi ndings?
4. What are rates of food insecurity for your county or region? Visit a rural food pantry 
to gather information from the pantry director, manager, or another supervisor. How 
many clients does the pantry serve? How much food is distributed annually? Who are 
the pantry’s typical clients? How is food obtained? Does the pantry off er wraparound 
services such as job training, stable housing, counseling, nutrition education, or other 
off erings designed to promote self-effi  cacy? What are the pantry director’s thoughts 
regarding best practices for approaching rural food insecurity?
5. HPSAs are common in rural regions of the United States. Is there a shortage of health 
professionals in your county/region? Interview a rural health professional to ask for the 
practitioner’s opinion about advantages/disadvantages of rural practice, as well as the 
reasons the practitioner thinks some professionals may avoid rural practice.
6. What are some common issues associated with maintenance of patient/client privacy 
in rural health settings? Develop one or two examples of scripting that could be used in 
response to inappropriate questions.
7. Develop your own defi nition of cultural competence. Compare your defi nition with 
one or two other colleagues’ defi nitions and revise your defi nition as appropriate.
8. Use the RHNPM to develop a culturally appropriate nutrition intervention for a 
chosen rural region. Prepare associated learning materials. Describe members of the 
interprofessional healthcare team needed for the most eff ective implementation of your 
intervention.
9. What are some rural health resources and community assets available in your area/
region? What nutrition-specifi c resources are available? Create a resource list. 
Implement an Internet search for resources and contact key individuals and organiza-
tions as appropriate to complete your list.


===PAGE 213===
188 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
10. Create a personal developmental plan to both improve and maintain general and 
setting-focused skills for rural public health nutrition practice. In your plan, include at 
least three learning goals, as well as at least three references for appropriate resources 
for further learning. Justify your choice of each resource.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What are the strengths and weaknesses of each of the three offi  cial government defi nitions 
of the word “rural?” If you were asked to choose one of the three defi nitions as being most 
representative of the meaning of “rural,” which would it be? Justify your answer.
2. What factors should be considered by the PHN practitioner when choosing a defi ni-
tion of “rural” to apply to a particular project?
3. In regard to health and nutrition care, what are some of the problems and barriers 
rural regions may face compared to urban areas? Provide an example for each of these 
broad areas of rural issues: (a) access; (b) quality; (c) equity.
4. What leading causes of death in rural areas are nutrition-related? For each of the 
causes, what are specifi c associated nutrition concerns?
5. How might substance abuse issues impact the nutrition status of rural individuals and 
populations?
6. Food insecurity rates tend to be higher in rural areas, compared to urban counterparts. 
How might the PHN practitioner assess food insecurity levels of individuals residing in 
rural areas? What are some appropriate interventions?
7. What are some common challenges rural health practitioners face when working in 
rural areas? What might be some unique challenges for nutrition practice? List and 
discuss at least three such challenges.
8. What steps would an organization need to take in order to obtain the RHC designation?
9. Why is cultural competence important when working with rural populations?
10. Describe the RHNPM and its application as a theoretical framework for planning 
eff ective PHN interventions.
11. Which members of the interprofessional healthcare team might be involved in plan-
ning and delivering PHN interventions in rural settings? Describe the role of each 
profession in intervention delivery.
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Th e Sheps Center at the University of North Carolina: https://www.shepscenter.unc.edu/
programs-projects/rural-health/rural-hospital-closures/
Federal Offi  ce of Rural Health Policy: https://www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/index.html
National Rural Health Association: https://www.ruralhealthweb.org
Rural Health Information Hub: https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/
Rural Health Research Gateway: https://www.ruralhealthresearch.org/centers
Rural Policy Research Institute: http://www.rupri.org
State Offi  ces of Rural Health: https://nosorh.org/


===PAGE 214===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
189
GLOSSARY
Community assets: Any asset, characteristic, or resource (fi nancial, material, human) that 
has the potential to be used to improve the quality of life in a community (ctb.ku.edu/en/ta-
ble-of-contents/assessment/assessing-community-needs-and-resources/identify-community
-assets/main).
Community strengths: See Community assets.
Convenience stores: Typically, stores with a limited selection of groceries, designed for quick 
in and out with purchase of only a few items. Convenience stores may provide snack foods, 
soft  drinks, ready-to-eat items such as sandwiches and pizza, and a few staple foods such as 
milk and bread. Some convenience stores provide a more extensive selection of groceries, but 
typically lack fresh fruits and vegetables and fresh meats.
Core-based statistical area: Th e county or counties associated with at least one core (urban-
ized area or urban cluster of at least 10,000 residents) plus adjacent counties having a signif-
icant degree of social and/or economic integration with the core as measured by commuting 
ties with core-associated counties. Th e term “core-based statistical area” is used to refer to 
both metropolitan (population of 50,000 or more) and micropolitan (10,000 to <50,000) 
designations. Areas with population <10,000 are designated “noncore” (https://www.census
.gov/topics/housing/housing-patterns/about/core-based-statistical-areas.html).
Culture: Th e customary beliefs, social forms, and material traits of a racial, religious, or social 
group; also, the characteristic features of everyday existence (such as diversions or a way of life) 
shared by people in a place or time (www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/culture).
Cultural awareness: Acknowledgment of diff erences, including attitudes, values, and perspec-
tives, between the self and individuals from other backgrounds or parts of the world.
Cultural competence: Cultural competence is a set of congruent behaviors, attitudes, and pol-
icies that come together in a system, agency, or among professionals and enable that system, 
agency, or those professionals to work eff ectively in cross-cultural situations84 (nccc.george-
town.edu/curricula/culturalcompetence.html).
Dual relationships: Occur when there is a “blurring” of professional boundaries because of 
social relationships, as in a situation in which a health practitioner also sees clients socially. 
Such relationships are oft en deleterious to professional interactions. Dual relationships are not 
always inappropriate but should be intentional and carefully monitored by the practitioner.79
Federal Offi  ce of Rural Health Policy (FORHP): Housed within the Health Resources and 
Services Administration (HRSA) of the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). 
Designates all nonmetro counties as “rural” and uses an additional designator of rurality, the 
RUCA codes. Th e FORHP collaborated with the USDA Economic Research Service to create 
the RUCAs (www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/index.html).
Federally Qualifi ed Health Center (FQHC): A health center that receives funding from the 
HRSA and is charged with providing primary care services to underserved populations. FQHCs 
are mandated to meet a number of requirements, including continuous quality assessment, 
billing for services on an ability-to-pay sliding scale, and governance by a board that includes at 
least 51% center patients (www.hrsa.gov/opa/eligibility-and-registration/health-centers/fqhc/
index.html).


===PAGE 215===
190 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Food desert: Th e USDA defi nes a “food desert” as a neighborhood that lacks healthy food 
resources; characteristics that contribute to food deserts include income level, distance to su-
permarkets, and access to vehicles (www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research
-atlas/documentation).
Food security: Categories are as follows: (a)  high food security: no reported food-access 
problems or limitations; (b) marginal food security: one or two reported indications—typ-
ically of anxiety over food suffi  ciency or shortage of food in the house and little or no indi-
cation of changes in diets or food intake; (c) low food security: reports of reduced quality, 
variety, or desirability of diet and little or no indication of reduced food intake; (d) very low 
food security: reports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and reduced food 
intake59 (https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/
defi nitions-of-food-security/).
Full-service grocery store: Typically, a retail store that sells a wide selection of groceries in-
cluding fresh and frozen fruits and vegetables, meats, dairy products, grains and cereals, and 
infant foods/formulas. Full-service grocery stores are designed for longer and more extensive 
shopping trips, in which purchase of all food supplies needed for a period of time can be ac-
complished (mohealth.uservoice.com/knowledgebase/articles/1849183-what-is-a-full-service
-grocery-store).
Healthcare disparities: Diff erences in access to or availability of facilities and services (www.
nlm.nih.gov/hsrinfo/disparities.html).
Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA): A designation that indicates a specifi c entity suf-
fers health provider shortages in one or more of three provider types: primary care, dental 
care, and mental health. HPSAs may be geographically based, population-based (i.e., a short-
age of providers for a specifi c population group), or facility-based (bhw.hrsa.gov/shortage
-designation/hpsas).
Health status disparities: Variation in rates of disease occurrence or disabilities among so-
cioeconomic or geographically defi ned population groups, resulting from health disparities 
(www.nlm.nih.gov/hsrinfo/disparities.html).
Holler: Geographically, a long, narrow lowland between mountains or hills, oft en rising in 
elevation from the entrance to the furthest point along the lowland; oft en has a creek or river 
running along the bottom; usually has only one way in and out. In Appalachian parlance, one 
might say, “I live down in the holler.”85
Interprofessional: Occurring between or involving two or more professions or profession-
als. In healthcare, interprofessional collaborations bring together persons who practice two 
or more healthcare disciplines in order to promote optimized outcomes for patients or clients 
(www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/interprofessional).
Metropolitan: A county containing an urbanized area with a population over 50,000; can also 
include adjacent counties that do not meet the urbanized population requirements for met-
ropolitan status but are linked to the neighboring metropolitan county by commuting and 
employment patterns. (See Core-based statistical area.)
Micropolitan: A nonmetropolitan county that includes an urbanized area with a population of 
10,000 to < 50,000 population. 


===PAGE 216===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
191
Mortality: Th e number of deaths in a given time or place (www.merriam-webster.com/dictio-
nary/mortality).
Non-core rural county: A county that has no urbanized areas with populations in excess of 10,000. 
Potentially excess deaths: Deaths among persons <80 years old in excess of the number that 
would be expected if the group-specifi c death rates of chosen benchmark states occurred across 
all states (www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/ss/ss6602a1.htm).
Resilience: Th e ability to adapt successfully to life stressors and adverse events; occurs at both 
individual and community levels. Resilience is oft en described as the ability to “bounce back” 
from negative life occurrences (www.apa.org/helpcenter/road-resilience.aspx).
Rural: According to the USCB, “rural” encompasses any land area that is not urban (https://
www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas/urban-rural.html).
Rural Health Clinic (RHC): A clinic, designated as such by the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS), providing primary care services to residents of rural, underserved 
areas. RHCs receive enhanced reimbursement rates from Medicare and Medicaid for approved 
services. RHCs operate under a diff erent set of requirements than FQHCs (www.cms.gov/Out-
reach-and-Education/Medicare-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNProducts/downloads/Rural-
HlthClinfctsht.pdf).
Rural hospital closures: Rural hospitals have been closing in recent years at rates higher than 
those of nonrural hospitals. Since 2005, at least 168 rural hospitals have gone out of business, 
and the trend continues to increase.32 Closings are usually related to fi nancial challenges. Rural 
hospitals tend to care for a patient base that is likely to be smaller, and experience diffi  culties 
related to physician and caregiver shortages. In addition, rural patients are more likely to be 
uninsured. Th e closure of a rural hospital is typically devastating to the communities aff ected 
in terms of access to care, consequences to the local economy including direct loss of jobs, 
and community morale. Th e populations most aff ected by rural hospital closures tend to be 
the poor, minorities, and older adults with chronic conditions (www.hrsa.gov/enews/past-is-
sues/2017/october-19/hospitals-closing-increase.html).
Rurality: A term used to indicate that rural areas are not homogeneous; various degrees of 
rurality aff ect the characteristics of a given rural area (www.census.gov/newsroom/blogs/ran-
dom-samplings/2016/12/rurality_matters.html).
Rural populations: Th e USCB considers all populations residing outside an urban area, con-
sisting of UAs (50,000+ residents) or UCs (2,500–50,000 residents) to be “rural” populations. 
Th e OMB considers all persons residing outside an MSA (>50,000 residents) to be part of the 
“rural” population; the OMB designation of “rural” includes micropolitan areas. Th e USDA 
considers persons living in counties with RUCC designations of 4 to 10 to be “rural” with 10 
indicating the highest degree of rurality. In addition, in collaboration with the USDA Eco-
nomic Research Service, the FORHP considers all census tracts designated 4 to 10 on the 
RUCA scale to be rural with 10 designating the greatest degree of rurality (www.hrsa.gov/rural
-health/about-us/defi nition/index.html).
Rural–Urban Commuting Area (RUCA) Codes: Th e FORHP has collaborated with the 
USDA ERS to develop RUCAs. Th e system categorizes all census tracts based on population 
density and work commuting patterns, ranging from 1 for a census tract in a metropolitan 


===PAGE 217===
192 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
area core through 10 for a completely rural tract with no work commuting to an urban area. 
Typically, RUCAs 1 to 3 are considered urban, with the remainder either micropolitan, small 
town, or completely dispersed rural. A ZIP code approximation of RUCAs is available for use 
when census tract information is not available. Th e use of RUCA codes allows for identifi ca-
tion of rural areas within metropolitan counties (RUCCs 1–3); for example, the Grand Can-
yon is located in an Arizona county designated “metropolitan.” In the United States, there are 
132 very large area census tracts in which the RUCA code fails to account for long distances 
to services and low population; therefore, these areas have been designated “rural” although 
their offi  cial RUCA code is 2 or 3 (www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-commut-
ing-area-codes).
Rural–Urban Continuum Codes (RUCCs): Th e USDA ERS has categorized degrees of ru-
rality by the use of RUCCs, designated from 1 to 9. Th ese codes are assigned by county. Each 
county in the United States has been assigned an RUCC based on population density, degree 
of urbanization, and adjacency to metro areas. RUCCs 1 to 3 are designated metropolitan 
areas; RUCCs 4 to 9 are designated nonmetropolitan areas. An RUCC of 1 indicates a county 
that has a metropolitan area with a population size of 1 million or more; an RUCC of 9 in-
dicates a county with a population center of <2,500 or completely rural, and nonadjacent to 
any metropolitan county (www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuum-codes.
aspx).
Script: Prepared text used for delivering standardized responses in common healthcare sit-
uations. Scripts may be useful for greeting clients, answering the telephone, and responding 
to patient privacy questions. Scripts can be very helpful in enhancing consistency and quality 
in client interactions as well as reinforcing organizational culture and goals. However, care 
must be taken when utilizing scripts to  remain genuine and authentic and to provide individ-
ualized responses to patients (baird-group.com/articles/scripting-for-positive-patient-experi-
ence-fi ve-steps-for-success).
Social network: An individual’s network of family, friends, and other supportive persons; per-
sons to whom one can go for assistance when needed. Rural persons tend to have larger social 
networks than urban persons.
Substance abuse: Harmful or hazardous use of psychoactive substances, including alcohol, 
prescription drugs, and illicit drugs. Substance abuse can lead to psychoactive substance 
 dependency (www.who.int/topics/substance_abuse/en).
U.S. Census Bureau (USCB): Designates “urbanized” and “urban cluster” areas; designates all 
areas outside urbanized and urban cluster areas as “rural.” Defi nition is based on census tracts, 
not city or county boundaries (www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/about-us/defi nition/index.html).
Urban clusters (UCs): Designated by the USCB as areas with a population of 2,500 up to 
49,999; UCs do not follow city or county borders (www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/about-us/defi -
nition/index.html).
Urbanized areas (UAs): Designated by the USCB as areas with a population of 50,000 or great-
er; UAs do not follow city or county borders (www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/about-us/defi nition/
index.html).
Wraparound services: At a point of service (such as a county health department), clients may 
be referred to wraparound services to address social determinants of health with the objec-
tive of enhancing clients’ self-suffi  ciency and independence. Typical wraparound services may 


===PAGE 218===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
193
 include federal food assistance programs, physical and mental health and wellness services, 
skills training opportunities for living wage jobs, and housing assistance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Th e authors wish to gratefully acknowledge Michael Meit, MA, MPH, Co-Director, NORC Walsh 
Center for Rural Health Analysis, and Janice C. Probst, PhD, Former Director, Rural & Minority 
Health Research Center, Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina. Mr. Meit 
and Dr. Probst graciously reviewed this chapter, and provided valuable comments and sugges-
tions to the authors.
REFERENCES
1. Federal Offi  ce of Rural Health Policy. Rural Health Information Hub. 2017. https://www.ruralhealthinfo
.org
2. Bolin JN, Bellamy GR, Ferdinand AO, et al. Rural healthy people 2020: new decade, same challenges. J 
Rural Health. 2015;31(3):326–333. doi:10.1111/jrh.12116
3. Singh GK, Siahpush M. Widening rural–urban disparities in all-cause mortality and mortality from 
major causes of death in the USA, 1969–2009. J Urban Health. 2014;91(2):272–292. doi:10.1007/s11524
-013-9847-2
4. La Caille John P, Reynnells L. What Is “Rural”? 2006. https://www.nal.usda.gov/ric/what-is-rural#INTRO
5. Flora CB, Flora JL, Gasteyer SP. Rural Communities: Legacy and Change. Boulder, CO: Westview Press; 
2016.
6. Hart LG, Larson EH, Lishner DM. Rural defi nitions for health policy and research. Am J Public Health. 
2005;95(7):1149–1155. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2004.042432
7. U.S. General Accounting Offi  ce. Rural Development: Profi le of Rural Areas. Washington, DC: U.S. 
General Accounting Offi  ce; 1993.
8. U.S. Census Bureau. Urban and Rural. 2020. https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/
guidance/geo-areas/urban-rural.html
9. Federal Offi  ce of Rural Health Policy. Defi ning Rural Population. 2017. https://www.hrsa.gov/ruralhealth/
aboutus/defi nition.html
10. Offi  ce of Information and Regulatory Aff airs. Offi  ce of Management and Budget. 2010 standards for 
delineating metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas. Fed Regist. 2010;75:37246–37252.
11. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Rural-Urban Continuum Codes. 2013. 
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/rural-urban-continuum-codes
12. von Reichert C, Greiman L, Myers A, Rural Institute. Th e Geography of Disability in America: On 
Rural-Urban Diff erences in Impairment Rates. Missoula, MT: University of Montana; 2014. https://
scholarworks.umt.edu/ruralinst_independent_living_community_participation/7
13. Meit M. Final Report: Exploring Strategies to Improve Health and Equity in Rural Communities. Bethesda, 
MD: Walsh Center for Rural Health Analysis; 2018. http://www.norc.org/PDFs/Walsh%20Center/
Final%20Reports/Rural%20Assets%20Final%20 Report%20Feb%2018.pdf
14. Crespo R, Shrewsberry M, Cornelius-Averhart D, King HB. Appalachian regional model for organizing 
and sustaining county-level diabetes coalitions. Health Promot Pract. 2011;12(4):544–550.
15. Community-Wealth. Anchor Institutions. n.d. https://community-wealth.org/strategies/panel/anchors/
index.html
16. Adamy J, Overberg P. Rural America is the new ‘inner city’. Wall Street Journal. May 27, 2017.
17. Economic Research Service. Poverty Overview. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 
March 1, 2017.
18. Semeuls A. Th e graying of rural America. Th e Atlantic.June 2, 2016. https://www.theatlantic.com/
business/archive/2016/06/the-graying-of-rural-america/485159
19. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. Population and Migration: Overview. 
2017. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/rural-economy-population/population-migration.aspx


===PAGE 219===
194 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
20. Bailey R. Stuck: A Reason writer returns to Appalachia to ask: why don’t people who live in places with 
no opportunity just leave? Reason. 2017(January). https://reason.com/2016/12/10/stuck
21. Hing E, Hsiao C. State variability in supply of offi  ce-based primary care providers: United States 2012. 
NCHS Data Brief. 2014;151:1–8.
22. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Emergency Medical Treatment & Labor Act (EMTALA). 
2012. https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EMTALA
23. National Rural Health Association. About Rural Health Care. 2017. https://www.ruralhealthweb.org/
about-nrha/about-rural-health-care
24. Rural Health Information Hub. Selected Social Determinants of Health. 2015. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.
org/states/united-states
25. Lu N, Samuels ME, Kletke PR, Whitler ET. Rural-urban diff erences in health insurance coverage and 
patterns among working-age adults in Kentucky. J Rural Health. 2010;26(2):129–138. doi:10.1111/
j.1748-0361.2010.00274.x
26. James W, Cossman JS. Long-term trends in black and white mortality in the rural United States: evidence 
of a race-specifi c rural mortality penalty. J Rural Health. 2017;33(1):21–31. doi:10.1111/jrh.12181
27. Kozhimannil KB, Hung P, Henning-Smith C, et al. Association between loss of hospital-based obstetric 
services and birth outcomes in rural counties in the United States. JAMA. 2018;319(12):1239–1247. 
doi:10.1001/jama.2018.1830
28. Council of State Governments. Capitol Facts and Figures: Health Care Workforce Shortages Critical 
in Rural America. April 2011. https://knowledgecenter.csg.org/kc/content/health-care-workforce-
shortages-critical-rural-america
29. Bureau of Health Workforce. Designated Health Professional Shortage Areas Statistics: Th ird Quarter of 
Fiscal Year 2019 Designated HPSA Quarterly Summary. 2019.
30. Stewart H, Jameson JP, Curtin L. Th e relationship between stigma and self-reported willingness to 
use mental health services among rural and urban older adults. Psychol Serv. 2015;12(2):141–148. 
doi:10.1037/a0038651
31. Rural Health Information Hub. Barriers to Transportation in Rural Areas. 2019. https://www
.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/transportation/1/barriers
32. Th e Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research. 168 Rural Hospital Closures: January 2005 - 
Present (126 since 2010). 2019. https://www.shepscenter.unc.edu/programs-projects/rural-health/rural
-hospital-closures/
33. National Rural Health Association. NRHA Save Rural Hospitals Action Center. Advocacy. 2018. https://
www.ruralhealthweb.org/advocate/save-rural-hospitals
34. Wishner J, Solleved P, Rudowitz R, et al. A Look at Rural Hospital Closures and Implications for Access 
to Care: Th ree Case Studies. Th e Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured. 2016. http://www
.kff .org/report-section/a-look-at-rural-hospital-closures-and-implications-for-access-to-care-three
-case-studies-issue-brief
35. Holmes GM, Slifk in RT, Randolph RK, Poley S. Th e eff ect of rural hospital closures on community 
economic health. Health Serv Res. 2006;41(2):467–485. doi:10.1111/j.1475-6773.2005.00497.x
36. Moy E, Macarena CG, Bastian B, et al. Leading causes of death in nonmetropolitan and metropolitan 
areas—United States, 1999–2014. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2017;66(6):1–8. doi:10.15585/mmwr.
ss6601a1
37. Mell HK, Mumma SM, Hiestand B, et al. EMS response times are double in rural vs. urban areas. JAMA 
Surg. 2017;152(10):983–984. doi:10.1001/jamasurg.2017.2230
38. Bhuyan SS, Wang Y, Opoku S, Lin G. Rural–urban diff erences in acute myocardial infarction mortality: 
evidence from Nebraska. J Cardiovasc Dis Res. 2013;4(4):209–213. doi:10.1016/j.jcdr.2014.01.006
39. Houck K, Wogu AF, Villagra V, et al. National survey of breast cancer screening in rural America. J Clin 
Oncol. 2013;31(26 suppl):13. doi:10.1200/jco.2013.31.26_suppl.13
40. Hale NL, Bennett KJ, Probst JC. Diabetes care and outcomes: disparities across rural America. J 
Community Health. 2010;35(4):365–374. doi:10.1007/s10900-010-9259-0
41. National Center for Health Statistics. Table 75: Selected measures of access to medical care among adults 
aged 18–64, by urbanization level and selected characteristics: United States, average annual, 2002–2004 
through 2010–2012. Washington, DC; 2013.


===PAGE 220===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
195
42. Sattelmeyer S. 3 Strategies to Increase Opportunity and Economic Mobility in Rural America. Research and 
Analysis. 2016. http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/analysis/2016/07/18/3-strategies
-to-increase-opportunity-and-economic-mobility-in-rural-america
43. U.S. Census Bureau. American Community Survey. 2017. https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs
44. Bastian B, Tejada Vera B, Arias E, et al. Mortality trends in the United States, 1900–2017. National 
Center for Health Statistics; 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data-visualization/mortality-trends/index
.htm 
45. Meit M, Knudson A, Gilbert T, et al. Th e 2014 Update of the Rural-Urban Chartbook. Bethesda, MD: 
Walsh Center for Rural Health Analysis; 2014.
46. Centers for Disease Control. CDC Newsroom: American Indian and Alaska Native Death Rates Nearly 
50 percent Greater Th an Th ose of Non-Hispanic Whites. 2014. https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/
p0422-natamerican-deathrate.html
47. North Carolina State Center for Health Statistics and Offi  ce of Minority Health and Health Disparities. 
North Carolina Minority Health Facts: American Indians. Raleigh, NC: Department of Health and 
Human Services; 2010.
48. Smith BL, Sandlin AT, Bird TM, et al. Maternal mortality in the Delta region of the United States. 
J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 2015;44(s1):S66–S67. doi:10.1111/1552-6909.12639
49. Rural Health Information Hub. Rural Health Disparities. 2019. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/topics/
rural-health-disparities#minority-populations
50. Singh GK, Kogan MD, Slifk in RT. Widening disparities in infant mortality and life expectancy between 
Appalachia and the rest of the United States, 1990–2013. Health Aff . 2017;36(8):1423–1432. doi:10.1377/
hlthaff .2016.1571
51. World Health Organization. ICD-10: International Statistical Classifi cation of Diseases and Related 
Health Problems. 10th rev ed. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2010.
52. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics Evidence Analysis Library. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 
Guideline. 2008. https://www.andeal.org/topic.cfm?menu=5301
53. Rural Health Information Hub. Substance Abuse in Rural Areas. 2015. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/
topics/substance-abuse#drug-abuse
54. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Treatment Episode Data Set: A Comparison 
of Rural and Urban Substance Abuse Treatment Admissions. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services; 2012.
55. National Center for Health Statistics. NCHS data on drug-poisoning deaths. NCHS Fact Sheets. 2017. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/factsheets/factsheet_drug_poisoning.pdf
56. Keyes KM, Cerdá M, Brady JE, et al. Understanding the rural–urban diff erences in nonmedical 
prescription opioid use and abuse in the United States. Am J Public Health. 2013;104(2):e52–e59. 
doi:10.2105/ajph.2013.301709
57. Nabipour S, Ayu Said M, Hussain Habil M. Burden and nutritional defi ciencies in opiate addiction—
systematic review article. Iran J Public Health. 2014;43(8):1022–1032.
58. Decher N. Nutritional implications of opioid-induced bowel dysfunction in chronic pain management. 
Support Line. 2009;31(6):19–27.
59. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Defi nitions of Food Security. 2016. https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/
food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/defi nitions-of-food-security
60. Coleman-Jensen A, Rabbitt MP, Gregory CA, Singh A. Household Food Security in the United States in 
2015. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service; 2016.
61. Piontak JR, Schulman MD. Food insecurity in rural America. Contexts: J Am Sociol Assoc. 2014;13(3):75–
77. doi:10.1177/1536504214545766
62. Economic Research Service. Food Environment Atlas. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture; 
2016.
63. Wolfrath J, Ryan B, Nehring P. Dollar Stores in Small Communities—Are Th ey a Good Fit for Your 
Town? Downtown Economics. University of Wisconsin Extension Center for Community and Economic 
Development, Wisconsin Downtown Action Council; 2018;2019, issue 187.
64. Seligman HK, Laraia BA, Kushel MB. Food insecurity is associated with chronic disease among low-
income NHANES participants. J Nutr. 2010;140(2):304–310. doi:10.3945/jn.109.112573


===PAGE 221===
196 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
65. Seligman HK, Bindman AB, Vittinghoff  E, et al. Food insecurity is associated with diabetes mellitus: 
results from the National Health Examination and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 1999–
2002. J Gen Intern Med. 2007;22(7):1018–1023. doi:10.1007/s11606-007-0192-6
66. Suarez JJ, Isakova T, Anderson CA, et al. Food access, chronic kidney disease, and hypertension in 
the U.S. Am J Prev Med. 2015;49(6):912–920. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2015.07.017
67. Whitaker RC, Phillips SM, Orzol SM. Food insecurity and the risks of depression and anxiety in 
mothers and behavior problems in their preschool-aged children. Pediatrics. 2006;118(3):e859–e868. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2006-0239
68. Jyoti DF, Frongillo EA, Jones SJ. Food insecurity aff ects school children’s academic performance, weight 
gain, and social skills. J Nutr. 2005;135(12):2831–2839. doi:10.1093/jn/135.12.2831
69. Farahbakhsh J, Hanbazaza M, Ball GDC, et al. Food insecure student clients of a university-based food 
bank have compromised health, dietary intake and academic quality. Nutr Diet. 2017;74(1):67–73. 
doi:10.1111/1747-0080.12307
70. Frith E, Loprinzi PD. Food insecurity and cognitive function in older adults: brief report. Clin Nutr. 
2018;37(5):1765–1768. doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2017.07.001
71. Roush D. Physicians Off er Insights on Practicing Rural Medicine. 2008. http://www.healthleadersmedia
.com/community-rural/physicians-off er-insights-practicing-rural-medicine?page=0%2C1
72. Daniels ZM, VanLeit BJ, Skipper BJ, et al. Factors in recruiting and retaining health professionals for 
rural practice. J Rural Health. 2007;23(1):62–71. doi:10.1111/j.1748-0361.2006.00069.x
73. McGrail MR, Wingrove PM, Petterson SM, Bazemore AW. Mobility of US rural primary care physicians 
during 2000–2014. Ann Fam Med. 2017;15(4):322–328. doi:10.1370/afm.2096
74. Collins C. Challenges of recruitment and retention in rural areas. N C Med J. 2016;77(2):99–101. 
doi:10.18043/ncm.77.2.99
75. South Carolina GME Advisory Group. Leveraging Graduate Medical Education to Increase Primary Care 
and Rural Physician Capacity in South Carolina: A report by the South Carolina GME Advisory Group in 
response to 2013-2014 Appropriations-Bill 3710 Part IB, Proviso 33.34 (E). Columbia, SC: South Carolina 
Department of Health and Human Services; 2014.
76. Ballance D, Kornegay D, Evans P. Factors Th at Infl uence Physicians to Practice in Rural Locations: A 
Review. Augusta, GA: Medical College of Georgia; 2009.
77. Brooks RG, Walsh M, Mardon RE, et al. Th e roles of nature and nurture in the recruitment and retention 
of primary care physicians in rural areas: a review of the literature. Acad Med. 2002;77(8):790–798. 
doi:10.1097/00001888-200208000-00008
78. Rural Health Information Hub. Rural Health Clinics (RHCs). 2019. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/
topics/rural-health-clinics
79. Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualifi ed 
Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing Guide. 2016. https://www.cms.gov/Outreach-and-Education/Medicare
-Learning-Network-MLN/MLNMattersArticles/Downloads/SE1039.pdf
80. Nelson WA, ed. Handbook for Rural Health Care Ethics: A Practical Guide for Professionals. Hanover, 
NH: Dartmouth College Press: University Press of New England; 2009.
81. Osborn A. Juggling personal life and professionalism: ethical implications for rural school psychologists. 
Psychol Sch. 2012;49(9):876–882. doi:10.1002/pits.21642
82. Berndt A, Murray CM, Kennedy K, et al. Eff ectiveness of distance learning strategies for continuing 
professional development (CPD) for rural allied health practitioners: a systematic review. BMC Med 
Educ. 2017;17(1):117. doi:10.1186/s12909-017-0949-5
83. National Center for Cultural Competence. Defi nitions of Cultural Competence. Curricula Enhancement 
Module Series. 2017. https://nccc.georgetown.edu/curricula/culturalcompetence.html
84. Cross TL, Bazron B, Dennis K, Isaacs M. Towards a Culturally Competent System of Care. Vol. 1. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Child Development Center; 1989.
85. Lundy R. Victuals. New York, NY: Clarkson/Potter Publishers; 2016.
86. Harkin A. Hillbilly: A Cultural History of an American Icon. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 
2004.
87. Veteto JR. Down deep in the holler: chasing seeds and stories in southern Appalachia. J Ethnobiol 
Ethnomed. 2013;9(1):69. doi:10.1186/1746-4269-9-69.
88. Gutschall M, Th ompson KL. Addressing health disparities in rural nutrition practice: a qualitative 
model from rural Appalachia. J Hunger Environ Nutr. 2017;13(1):84–89.


===PAGE 222===
 
8. Rural Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
197
89. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2016 National Survey on 
Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables; 2017, September 27. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/
fi les/NSDUH-DetTabs-2016/NSDUH-DetTabs-2016.pdf 
90. Holuby RS, Pellegrin KL, Barbato A, Ciarleglio A. Recruitment of rural healthcare professionals for live 
continuing education. Med Educ Online. 2015;20:1–3. doi:10.3402/meo.v20.28958
91. Lengerich EJ, Bohland JR, Brown PK, et al. Images of Appalachia. Prev Chronic Dis. 2006;3(4):1–3.
92. United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Urban Infl uence Codes. Updated 
October 24, 2019. Accessed March 13, 2020, at https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/urban
-infl uence-codes.aspx


===PAGE 224===
9
URBAN HEALTH AND 
URBANIZATION: ACTING 
ON SOCIAL DETERMINANTS 
IN URBAN SETTINGS
ARELIS MOORE DE PERALTA, MICHELLE EICHINGER, AND LESLIE HOSSFELD
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Identify social determinants that infl uence food access and nutritional patterns in urban 
settings.
2. Understand the role of urbanization in food access, availability, and aff ordability.
3. Explain the components of urban food challenges.
4. Defi ne gentrifi cation and understand its role in food insecurity and food access.
5. Understand the processes involved with developing a community food system.
6. Understand socio-ecological approaches to healthier nutrition in urban settings.
7. Discuss evidence-based practices and protective factors that promote healthier nutritional 
patterns in urban settings.
INTRODUCTION
Th e urban environment disproportionately aff ects vulnerable population groups with poor hous-
ing conditions, segregated neighborhoods, and limited access to resources. Maintaining a healthy 
diet can be challenging in this context. Food deserts, gentrifi cation, poverty, and other urban 
environment processes infl uence nutritional patterns in these settings. Th is chapter includes a 
review of the challenges on access to, aff ordability of, and availability to food in urban settings. 
Diff erences in health are striking in urban communities with poor social determinants of health 
(SDOH) such as unstable housing, low income, unsafe neighborhoods, or substandard education. 
Th is chapter presents a description of the Social-Ecological Model (SEM) as well as its application 
to explore social determinants of nutritional health in urban settings. Th e chapter portrays the 
SEM as an integrative framework that shows great promise in improving dietary behaviors and 
the nutritional status of vulnerable urban populations, including those aff ected by conditions 
such as type 2 diabetes. Strategies to improve the urban food environment are reviewed, with a 
focus on community gardens as a promising urban strategy to promote sustainable development. 


===PAGE 225===
200 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Two interdisciplinary case studies that utilize an ecological or holistic approach to nutrition and 
lifestyle improvement are summarized.
Urbanization and Urban Health
Urbanization has been a phenomenon not only in the United States but globally. Urbanization is 
the population shift  from more rural areas to more urban areas, causing expansion of and popula-
tion growth in cities. Much of this movement is due to economic drivers such as job opportunities 
and more services.
Urban populations present diff ering health concerns than populations in rural areas. It is com-
mon for children residing in urban settings to experience asthma due to poorer air quality or fam-
ilies having limited access to outdoor recreation space for physical activity. Further, the social and 
economic determinants of health create disproportionate risk factors that contrast between rural 
and urban environments. Violent crime rates can be twice as high in urban areas, and sexually 
transmitted diseases, tuberculosis, infant mortality, and drug and alcohol use are more prevalent 
in urban areas.1 Th e urban environment disproportionately aff ects vulnerable population groups 
with poor housing conditions, segregated neighborhoods, and limited access to resources.2
In developed countries, diet behavior seems to be associated with cost and convenience. People 
are working and commuting. Families are struggling with both parents working, which means lim-
ited time to prepare, cook, and eat meals, whether it is in the home, at work, or school. In urban 
areas, convenience stores, fast-food chains, and restaurants line the streetscape. Yet, despite the 
availability of convenient and inexpensive food, the diet does not necessarily contribute to a healthy 
lifestyle. Several factors infl uence diet behavior. When considering the urban environment, these 
dietary factors oft en diff er from those in nonurban areas, which can infl uence health outcomes.
Healthy Diet
Urban areas typically have more options for eating. Th ese oft en include various types of restau-
rants such as sit-down dining and fast food, but also street food vendors in larger metropolises 
and diff erent scales of grocery stores. With the variety of food options typically available in urban 
areas, establishing a healthy diet is possible. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), a healthy diet is a diet rich with whole grains, low-fat or nonfat dairy, a variety of lean 
proteins, plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables, and food and drinks low in sodium, saturated fat, 
and added sugars. However, maintaining a healthy diet can be challenging to some population 
groups, depending on their geographic area and socioeconomic status. Food deserts in urban 
areas are defi ned by the USDA as geographic areas with low-income census tracts (i.e., geograph-
ically defi ned areas determined by the U.S. Bureau of the Census, and which are equivalent to 
neighborhoods) and no supermarket within 1 mile. Low-income census tracts are identifi ed as a 
census tract with any one of the following:
 
■
At least 20% of the population at or below the federal poverty level (FPL)
 
■
Median household income 80% or less than the state’s median household income
 
■
Metropolitan household median income 80% or less than the metropolitan’s median 
household income
Figure 9.1 displays a map of food deserts in Atlanta, Georgia. Residents living in food deserts 
may rely on the food available in their neighborhood, such as corner stores or dollar stores, or 
may have to travel distances for more aff ordable healthy food. Th erefore, maintaining a healthy 
diet may be more challenging for households located in food deserts.


===PAGE 226===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
201
FIGURE 9.1 U.S. Department of Agriculture food desert map of Atlanta, Georgia. The shaded 
areas are census tracts identifi ed as food deserts. The dark box indicates Atlanta.
Source: From U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Food Access Research Atlas. https://www
.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research-atlas/documentation
Urbanization and Gentrifi cation
Urbanization is population movement from rural areas to more urban areas causing an increase 
in population in cities and the expansion of cities. Urban renewal projects to support economic 
growth and improve livability in urban areas, and specifi cally in blighted areas, have attracted new 
residents and business owners. While this is appealing for cities, it unfortunately can come at a cost 
to those living in those areas. Gentrifi cation is the change in neighborhood characteristics from 
low-income communities, oft en rife with crime, minority populations, and limited resources, to the 
opposite of high-income households and nonminority population groups. Gentrifi cation results in 
the displacement of low-income residents following urban renewal or revitalization projects.
Gentrifi cation changes the food retail environment. Urbanization has created a “foodie” cul-
ture and has been one of the leading factors of gentrifi cation.3 High-end supermarkets and food 
retailers locate in these communities and while these retailers provide an abundance of high-qual-
ity food, the costs of the food are too high for long-standing residents.3 Food prices in urban areas 
are a contributing infl uence to food insecurity.4
Urban Food Challenges
Food Deserts
In urban areas, we oft en see “food deserts,” or the lack of a supermarket in low-income areas. 
Supermarkets are not likely to be in cities, but rather in the periphery or suburban areas. Th ere 


===PAGE 227===
202 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
are several reasons for this geographical distribution. Supermarkets oft en require large square 
footage of fl oor space, which requires more land. Cities, with their high density of developed 
land uses, have a limited amount of open space to meet the needs for supermarkets. Along with 
limited availability of land to build supermarkets, the cost of land is oft en high in cities, which 
contributes to supermarkets locating outside urban areas. Th erefore, the availability of healthy 
foods is limited within cities.
Food retailers located in cities oft en are smaller with limited availability of healthy foods such 
as fresh fruits and vegetables and perishable items. Land costs are higher in urban areas resulting 
in higher leasing and rental costs for storeowners. Consequently, some of these costs are passed 
on to the consumer through higher food prices.
Availability in Urban Settings
Th e urban food environment sees a greater variety of food retail and services. Yet, the urban retail 
food environment may not be associated with increased availability of healthy food options. Th ere 
are a limited number of supermarkets in urban areas, contributing to food deserts in low-income 
areas. Instead, small grocers, such as bodegas and corner stores, convenience/gas stores, phar-
macies, and dollar stores are oft en the options available to urban households, especially for those 
with limited resources. Although small grocers may sell some fresh produce, it is unlikely that 
nontraditional stores sell whole grains or perishable items, such as fresh fruits and vegetables.5 
Healthy foods are perceived as not profi table by nontraditional food retail owners.5 Further, as the 
density of convenience stores increases, as in urban areas, residents are less likely to have a healthy 
diet.6 In addition, a new term called food swamps describes a geographic location that has a high 
concentration of businesses that sell “junk food” (high-calorie, low-nutrition food) more so than 
healthier food outlets.7 Mobile markets, produce carts, and community gardens and transforming 
corner stores to include the sale of healthy food can increase opportunities for healthy food in 
urban settings.8
Access to Food in Urban Settings
While healthy food choices may be available, is a healthy diet accessible to everyone? Th e term 
“accessible” is broad, but in this section, the term focuses on the ability to get to destinations via 
transportation. Th ere are transportation disparities related to geographic area, aging, disability, 
race/ethnicity, and income. As population density increases, vehicle ownership decreases, and 
about 20% of low-income households do not own a vehicle.9 In addition, about 40% of those with 
disabilities, or about 6 million people nationwide, have transportation diffi  culties such as the 
inability to drive or no access to other modes of transportation.10
Households with no vehicle have limited access to healthy food options and depend on other 
means to get to supermarkets and healthy food retailers. Households with no vehicle access 
make fewer shopping trips for groceries than households with suffi  cient access.11 In addition, 
despite access-burdened households and access-suffi  cient households making comparable trips 
to unhealthy food retailers (convenience stores, pharmacies, and dollar stores), access-burdened 
households spend more per capita on food in these retail places.11 Further, households with no 
vehicle access are at higher risk of food insecurity, especially among households in public hous-
ing.12 However, a supermarket within walking distance, or within 1,000 meters of home, is asso-
ciated with lower body mass index and higher consumption of fruits and vegetables, even for 
disadvantaged population groups.13,14


===PAGE 228===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
203
Public transit provides accessibility opportunities, especially for older adults, people with low 
income, and those with disabilities. As it relates to healthy eating, public transit that connects 
residential areas to grocery stores and farmers’ markets increases access to healthy food. However, 
transit users have limited choices for supermarkets or grocery stores with limited stops to such 
food retailers. In addition, travel time is more likely to be longer, including multiple transfers to 
other routes in order to reach the destination. Transit users also need to factor in travel costs and 
carrying groceries back to their home.
Affordability in Urban Settings
Cost has been a prohibitive factor in healthy living, especially as it relates to diet choices. In terms 
of diet, there is a cost disparity between nutrient-rich foods and less healthy food options.15 Th is 
poses an economic challenge, and potential barrier, for those from a lower socioeconomic status. 
Aff ordability of healthy foods may have more of an impact on diet patterns than the distance to 
the nearest supermarket. Grains with added sugars and added fats are less expensive, tasty, and 
convenient, and have been associated with lower quality diets, lower food costs, and lower socio-
economic status.16 Further, staple foods such as milk, peanut butter, eggs, legumes, and cereals are 
up to 50% more expensive in small grocers compared to supermarkets.17 Lack of aff ordability of 
food contributes to food insecurity. Low income and poverty are associated with food insecurity 
or reduced quality, variety, and desirability of diet with disrupted eating patterns.
Federal programs such as the USDA Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and 
the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) provide 
income-eligible households with fi nancial assistance for purchasing foods. Expansion of these 
programs, including the Senior Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program and the WIC Farmers’ 
Market Nutrition Program, increases the purchasing power for healthy foods.18 Th e following 
section conceptualizes SDOH and poor nutritional status as a prevalent SDOH in urban settings.
SDOH: Poor Nutritional Status
Low-resource communities across the country especially face a lack of availability of basic ser-
vices, which can infl uence the health of their residents.19 Research has shown that the health of 
a community is not determined only by its healthcare system, but it is also determined by access 
to social and economic opportunities; the resources and supports available in our households, 
neighborhoods, and communities; the quality of our schooling; the safety of our workplaces; the 
cleanliness of our water, food, and air; and the nature of our social interactions and relationships.20 
Th is multitude of factors does not deny that medical care infl uences health; rather, it indicates that 
medical care is not the only infl uence on health and suggests that the eff ects of medical care may 
be more limited than commonly thought.21–24
Th e Commission on Social Determinants of Health (CSDH) developed a relevant frame-
work (Figure 9.2) to explain how social, economic, and political mechanisms give rise to a set 
of socioeconomic positions whereby populations are stratifi ed according to income, education, 
occupation, gender, race/ethnicity, and other factors. Th ese socioeconomic positions in turn 
shape specifi c determinants of health status (intermediary determinants) refl ective of people’s 
place within social hierarchies. Based on their respective social status, individuals experience 
diff erences in exposure and vulnerability to health-compromising conditions. Together, context, 
structural mechanisms, and the resultant socioeconomic position of individuals are “structural 
determinants.” Th e underlying SDOH inequities operate through a set of intermediary determi-
nants of health to shape health outcomes.25


===PAGE 229===
204 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
SDOH are conditions in the environments in which people are born, live, learn, work, play, 
worship, and age that aff ect a wide range of health, functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes and 
risks. Conditions (e.g., social, cultural, political, economic, and environmental) in these vari-
ous environments and settings (e.g., school, church, workplace, and neighborhood) have been 
referred to as “place.”20 Th ese place-related factors aff ect the health of low-resource communities 
at the varying levels of society, community, and even individuals themselves.26 For instance, pov-
erty limits access to healthy foods, safe neighborhoods, and strong educational systems. All these 
factors are predictors of better health. Diff erences in health are striking in communities with poor 
SDOH such as unstable housing, low income, unsafe neighborhoods, or substandard education.27 
Education has been identifi ed as one of the relevant SDOH. Figure 9.3 portrays how education 
aff ects health, and Figure 9.4 depicts the infl uence of educational attainment on the perceived 
health status of individuals among adults aged 25 to 74 years within racial/ethnic groups in the 
United States, 2008–2010.
Low-resource communities affl  icted by a myriad of SDOH are prevalent in urban set-
tings across the globe. Th e World Health Organization (WHO) has stressed the relevance of 
the many benefi ts urban health investments have on individuals and society.28 However, the 
WHO warns that there are many inadequacies in the way these health investments are planned 
and implemented, particularly by focusing mostly on fostering economic growth and better 
incomes in urban settings. In addition to economic growth and income, the SDOH must be 
considered.
Fruit and vegetable consumption is declining in the United States, and fat and calorie con-
sumption is increasing. Th ese nutritional status related facts contradict research fi ndings showing 
that 88% of U.S. household had access, at all times, to enough food for an active, healthy life for 
all household members.29 Urbanization and food systems are examples of what WHO labeled as 
“themes” to consider in addressing SDOH.28 Regarding food systems, for example, even though 
urban residents might have more access to, more choices of, and more money for food, they can 
FIGURE 9.2 Final form of the CSDH conceptual framework.
CSDH, Commission on Social Determinants of Health.
Source: From Solar O, Irwin A. A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. Social Deter-
minants of Health Discussion Paper 2 (Policy and Practice). Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
SOCIOECONOMIC
AND POLITICAL
CONTEXT
Governance
Macroeconomic
policies
Socioeconomic
position
Education
Occupation
Income
Culture and
societal values
Social policies
labour market,
housing, land
Public policies
education, health,
social protection
Social class
gender
ethnicity (racism)
STRUCTURAL DETERMINANTS
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF
HEALTH INEQUITIES
Social cohesion
and social capital
INTERMEDIARY DETERMINANTS
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS
OF HEALTH
Material circumstances
(Living and working
conditions, food
availability, etc.)
Behaviors and
biological factors
Psychosocial factors
Health system
IMPACT ON
EQUITY IN
HEALTH
AND
WELL-BEING


===PAGE 230===
205
FIGURE 9.3 Pathways through which education can affect health.
Source: From Egerter S, Braveman P, Sadegh-Nobari T, et al. Education Matters for Health. Exploring the Social 
Determinants of Health: Issue Brief no. 6. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; Copyright 2011. Used with 
permission from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Educational
attainment
Educational
attainment
Educational
attainment
Work
Working
conditions
Work-
related
resources
Income
Health
Health
Health
Control beliefs
Social standing
Social networks
Health knowledge,
literacy, coping, and
problem-solving
Diet
Exercise
Smoking
Health/disease
Exposure to hazards
Control/demand imbalance
Stress
Health insurance
Sick leave
Wellness programs
Stress
Coping and problem
solving
Response to stressors
Health-related behaviors
Social and economic
resources
Perceived status
Social and economic
resources
Social support
Norms for healthy
behavior
Stress
Housing
Neighborhood
environment
Diet and exercise options
Stress
FIGURE 9.4 Socioeconomic gradients in poor/fair health among adults aged 25–74 years 
within racial/ethnic groups in the United States, 2008–2010.
Note: Age-adjusted. Based on self-report and measured as poor, fair, good, very good, or excellent. “Other” defined 
as any other or more than one racial or ethnic group, including any group with fewer than 3% of surveyed adults 
nationally in 2008–2010.
Source: From Braveman P, Egerter S. Overcoming Obstacles to Health in 2013 and Beyond: Report for the Robert 
Wood Johnson Foundation Commission to Build a Healthier America. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Founda-
tion; Copyright 2013. Used with permission from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
60
50
Less than high school
Percentage of adults aged 25–74 years
in poor/fair health
40
30
20
Black,
non-Hispanic
Hispanic
Asian
American Indian
or
Alaska Native
Other
White,
non-Hispanic
10
0
High school graduate
Education attainment
Some college
College graduate


===PAGE 231===
206 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
be more challenged in nourishment than their rural counterparts. Th e health and nutritional 
status of the urban poor may be worse than that of the rural poor.30 Convenience foods, pricing 
strategies, agricultural policies, and increases in typical U.S. portion sizes contribute to what has 
been described as a toxic environment.29 Lower availability of fresh produce, combined with 
concentrated fast-food outlets and few recreational opportunities, has increased among urban 
residents, magnifying their opportunities to eat a diet that features higher intakes of fat, sugars, 
and energy and reducing opportunities to engage in physical activity.30–32
Social contexts in urban settings, which include the structure of society or the social relations 
in society, create social stratifi cation and assign individuals to diff erent social positions. Social 
stratifi cation in turn engenders diff erential exposure to health-damaging conditions and diff er-
ential vulnerability in terms of health conditions and material resource availability. Social strati-
fi cation likewise determines diff erential consequences of ill health for more and less advantaged 
groups (including economic and social consequences) as well as diff erential health outcomes per 
se.25 Th e following section includes a description of the SEM as well as its application to promote 
healthier nutritional patterns in urban settings.
SOCIO-ECOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO HEALTHIER NUTRITION 
IN URBAN SETTINGS
Urie Bronfenbrenner’s Ecological Systems Th eory (1979) explored infl uences on behavior as 
a set of layers, in which each layer had an impact resulting in the next level. Th e researcher 
described these layers as being a series of Russian dolls, in which the internal level represents 
the individual, who is surrounded by diff erent levels of environmental impacts. For example, 
the social environment of a family, friends, and workplace is embedded within the physical 
environment of geography and community facilities, which is embedded in policy environ-
ments at diff erent levels of government or governing bodies. All levels of the SEM aff ect the 
behavior of the individual.33
Bronfenbrenner believed that a child’s development was aff ected by everything in his or 
her surrounding environment. He divided the person’s environment into fi ve diff erent levels: 
the microsystem, the mesosystem, the exosystem, the macrosystem, and the chronosystem 
(Figure 9.5). Th e microsystem is the system closest to the person and the one in which he 
or she has direct contact. Th is incorporates family/home life, peers (classmates), and school 
(teachers), and is likely the most infl uential level of ecological systems. Th e mesosystem con-
sists of interactions or linkages between diff erent parts of a child’s microsystem, for example, 
the role parents take in the school.34,35 Th e interactions can promote or detract from positive 
developmental outcomes depending on whether the microsystems work together or against 
one another.
Th e third level in the model is the exosystem. Th e exosystem does not involve the child directly, 
but has an indirect eff ect nonetheless.34,35 One example of this would be a parent’s employment 
status. Th e results of that reality aff ect the child’s environment by aff ecting his or her parent rather 
than having a direct infl uence on him or her. Other examples are neighbors, media, and school 
administration. Th e policies implemented by a school change the environment around the child 
without the child having any direct contact or input in the decisions. Th e next level of Ecological 
Systems Th eory is the macrosystem. Th e macrosystem encompasses the attitudes and ideologies 
of the broader culture surrounding the developing child.34,35 Th e fi nal level is the chronosystem. 
Th is is the even broader context of sociohistorical setting, the timing of life events, the passing of 


===PAGE 232===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
207
time, and transitions.34,35 Th is level is important for understanding how the macrosystem became 
the way it currently exists and can off er perspective on the changing landscape of human devel-
opment across time and history.
Th e SEM is usually adapted to suit particular behaviors and population groups. For example, 
severe mental illness would have various healthcare needs in various environments; therefore, 
intervention strategies would change for each population. While the components of the SEM 
would remain the same and can be used in a range of populations, the specifi c factors within each 
component will vary depending on the population group. Gardiner emphasized the interactive 
characteristic of the SEM stating that:
In short, an individual is seen not as a passive, static, and isolated entity on which the envi-
ronment exerts great infl uence (much like a tabula rasa, or blank slate), but as a dynamic 
and evolving being that interacts with, and thereby restructures, the many environments 
with which he or she comes in contact with.36
A Socio-Ecological Perspective of Nutritional Patterns
Birch and Anzman posited that within the past three decades, children are developing in an obesity-
promoting, or obesogenic, environment. Researchers and practitioners have used socio-ecological 
perspectives with the purpose of understanding the infl uence of the environment on the risk of 
developing health conditions associated with food consumption such as obesity and eating disor-
ders.37,38 For instance, Fiese and Jones argued that the dynamics of food consumption are linked 
FIGURE 9.5 The Social-Ecological Model.
Source: Adapted from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Social Ecological Model: A Framework 
for Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2013/12_0204.htm; Bronfenbrenner U. Toward an experimental 
 ecology of human development. Am Psychol. 1977;32:513–531.doi:10.1037/0003-066x.32.7.513
Individual
(knowledge,
attitudes, behaviors)
Community
(relationships between
organizations)
Organizational
(organizations and
social institutions)
Policy/enabling environment
(national, state, local laws)
Interpersonal
(families, friends,
social networks)


===PAGE 233===
208 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
to socialization practices, individual health, media infl uences, and contextual factors such as pov-
erty and culture.39 Th e authors maintained that food and family connect across diff erent ecologies 
to result in either poor or optimal outcomes for children under diff erent levels of risk. Neumark-
Sztainer used a socio-ecological approach to explore how multiple interacting factors contribute to 
the etiology of problems within dimensions of weight control in adolescents at the individual, famil-
ial, peer, school, community, and societal levels.38 Th e author found that families have an important 
role to play in reinforcing the positive infl uences at each of these levels and in fi ltering out the 
negative infl uences from the environment. However, the author argued that families could not do 
it on their own and need support from the more distal environments within which they function.
Fiese and Jones applied the ecological model put forth by Harrison et al., referred to as the 
Six-Cs Model (cell, child, clan, community, country, and culture), and simplifi ed the model by 
focusing on the dimensional attributes of the cell, child, clan, community, country, and cul-
ture with respect to the food environment (Figure 9.6).39,40 Th e authors expanded the model to 
consider how inadequate sources of food as experienced in food-insecure households may also 
compromise child development, and focused on how the accumulation of risk across ecologies 
may account for compromised development. Th e community sphere focuses on the impact that 
schools, peers, community factors, and access to food have on the food environment experienced 
by each child and family. Neighborhoods vary considerably in terms of the types of foods that are 
off ered for purchase, from fast-food outlets and convenience stores to large grocery stores and 
fruit and vegetable vendors. A family’s shopping habits may be directly infl uenced by their access 
to food in their neighborhood, which is also aff ected by socioeconomic resources.39 Research has 
shown that there is heightened targeting of energy-dense foods toward African American fami-
lies, who are also at greater risk for developing obesity.
FIGURE 9.6 Five-Cs Model of food and family: A socio-ecological perspective.
Source: From Fiese BH, Jones BL. Food and family: a socio-ecological perspective for child development. Adv Child 
Dev Behav. 2012;42:307–337. doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-394388-0.00009-5
Cell
genetic vulnerabilities
and protection
Child
self-regulation
food sensitivities
Country
regulations
policies
Community
access to food
Clan
mealtime routines
intergenerational practices
feeding styles
media exposure


===PAGE 234===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
209
Researchers have used the SEM to explore the role of socioeconomic and cultural factors in 
determining nutritional patterns in communities. One study explored the role of income and 
racial–ethnic disparities on fruit and vegetable consumption in urban communities.41 Other stud-
ies had explored determinants of nutritional patterns at school settings. For example, one study 
explored nutrition-related behavior and food patterns in the school environment, and another 
study tried to understand the association between factors at diff erent levels of the SEM and pupils’ 
dietary choices.42,43
Non-Hispanic Blacks and individuals with lower income are less likely to meet the USDA 
guidelines for the recommended daily servings of fruits and vegetables. Robinson conducted a lit-
erature review to examine dietary behaviors, focusing on fruit and vegetable intake of low-income 
African Americans from a socio-ecological perspective. Robinson found that dietary behaviors 
and fruit and vegetable intake among African Americans are the result of a complex interplay of 
personal, cultural, and environmental factors that can be categorized and described using the fi ve 
levels of infl uence conceptualized by the SEM.41 Th e author identifi ed factors at the intrapersonal 
level (taste preferences, habits, and nutritional knowledge and skills); interpersonal level/social 
environment (processes whereby culture, social traditions, and role expectations impact eating 
practices; and patterns within peer groups, friends, and family); and at the organizational, com-
munity, and public policy levels/physical environment (environmental factors that aff ect food 
access and availability).
A study showed that policies at local and school levels refl ect the national objectives with 
respect to nutritional guidelines, but were also infl uenced by multiple, competing interests at 
other socio-ecological levels.42 Th ese competing interests included pupils’ food preferences; orga-
nizational objectives such as protecting school meal uptake; and the practices of school meal 
staff . Townsend and Foster used multilevel analysis to study the association of each level of the 
SEM on student dietary choice while controlling for factors found at other levels in secondary 
schools in Wales.43 Th e authors found that student interpersonal factors, an individual’s social 
environment, had a greater association with the dietary choices students made for lunch than 
student  intrapersonal characteristics, those that reside within the person, which were found to 
have a greater association with the dietary choices made outside school. School organizational 
factors, such as rules and policies, had a greater association with whether students ate unhealthy 
foods, whereas the community nature of the school had a greater association with the choosing 
of healthy foods. Th ese studies portray that in addition to individual preferences, the ecological 
systems surrounding the life of these individuals play a key role in shaping dietary behaviors for 
individuals at the school and community levels.
Th e multifaceted aspects of the food environment have consequences for child develop-
ment in several ways including physical health and outcomes associated with nutrition such as 
obesity and malnutrition.39 Some of the recommendations, derived from the relevant research 
reviewed in this chapter, include that school-based interventions can use the SEM to tar-
get specifi c factors and to off er rationale for and guidance on integrating socio-ecological 
concepts into health promoting programs to improve dietary behaviors. Th ese eff orts would 
change student outcomes in the school setting.42,43 Moore et al. argued that the reach, eff ective-
ness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance of school food policies and interventions 
could be maximized by understanding and exploiting the interdependence between levels in 
the SEM.44
Th e following section includes a discussion on how a variety of factors at diff erent levels of the 
socio-ecological spectrum in urban settings determine nutritional outcomes for patients aff ected 
with type 2 diabetes, with an emphasis on underserved, minority urban populations.


===PAGE 235===
210 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Healthy Food Choice Accessibility, Type 2 Diabetes and Obesity
According to the American Diabetes Association, type 2 diabetes is the most common form of 
diabetes.45 Type 2 diabetes is treated with lifestyle changes, oral medications (pills), and insu-
lin. Some people with this illness can control their blood glucose with healthy eating and being 
active. However, your doctor may need to prescribe oral medications or insulin to help you meet 
your target blood glucose levels. Type 2 diabetes is more common in African Americans, Latinos, 
Native Americans, and Asian Americans/Pacifi c Islanders, as well as the aged population.45 
Medical nutrition therapy is essential in preventing the development of diabetes, and it is recog-
nized as a cornerstone of management in patients who have diabetes.46 Several factors contribute 
to unhealthy eating patterns, including lack of knowledge, automatic or habitual choice processes, 
and preference for convenience. All of these factors can be addressed in the context of the food 
environment.47,48 However, high-risk groups including low-income and elderly persons oft en lack 
the temporal, spatial, and fi nancial resources needed to obtain and consume a healthy diet.49
Over the past 100 years, ethnic minorities and the poor have become increasingly concentrated 
and isolated in low-income urban neighborhoods.50 Ensuring adequate medical nutrition therapy 
is challenging for low-income neighborhood residents, primarily underrepresented minorities. 
Poor accessibility to healthy and low-cost foods contributes to food insecurity, poor nutrition, 
and high-calorie consumption among vulnerable groups.48,49 Ghosh-Dastidar and colleagues pos-
ited that a lack of access to healthy foods might explain why residents of low-income neighbor-
hoods, African Americans, and Latinos in the United States have high rates of obesity and type 
2 diabetes.51 Th e authors added that high prices of healthy foods as well as lack of marketing of 
these types of foods are also important factors that may explain the increased type 2 diabetes and 
obesity risk for these minority groups.51
Th e urban poor have limited access to the resources and factors that promote health in the 
inner city. One of the most health promoting factors in inner cities is food. Food environmen-
tal factors shown to be important include the density of restaurants, including fast-food outlets 
and full-service venues, as well as the density of retail food stores, including supermarkets and 
convenience stores. However, in the urban context, food choice is oft en severely constrained.50 
Supermarkets, which off er a wide range of fresh produce, whole-grain products, and unprocessed 
foods recommended as part of a healthy diet and at less expensive prices than convenience stores, 
are an important source of aff ordable and nutritious foods.49 Changes in urban retailing in cit-
ies across the United States include reduction or elimination of urban amenities such as public 
transportation and large-scale supermarkets, primarily aff ecting the urban poor.50 Smoyer-Tomic, 
Spence, and Amrhein argued that the low point for urban retailing in the United States was in 
the 1980s, when cities experienced a net loss of supermarkets even as, nationally, store openings 
exceeded closings.49 Th e trend toward fewer, bigger stores located outside cities has continued 
to the present, leaving urban residents to pay higher prices for a narrower selection of food that 
oft en does not include the “nutritious” choices recommended for enhanced health and avoidance 
of “lifestyle” diseases like type 2 diabetes.50
Th e built environment (e.g., the density of farmers’ markets and the presence of farms with 
direct sales) is associated with the prevalence of obesity and type 2 diabetes, and a strong local 
food economy may play an important role in prevention.48 Hence, eff orts to prevent obesity and 
type 2 diabetes at the population level will require changes in the food environment that promote 
healthy, lower-caloric foods and discourage unhealthy foods.47,49 Another approach to prevent 
these conditions is the nutrition labeling on food packages, which addresses knowledge by pro-
viding detailed information about the nutritional and caloric content of a food, but many nutri-
tion labels require a high level of literacy and numeracy to interpret.47


===PAGE 236===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
211
It may be diffi  cult to change eating behaviors to be more consistent with healthy eating guide-
lines, particularly in high-risk populations, if aff ordable and nutritional foods are not readily acces-
sible.49 Once these nutritional choices are made accessible to the urban poor, nudging strategies that 
target automatic processes and preferences for convenience can manipulate the food environment 
to promote healthier choices among them.47 Salois recommended more research on the infl uence 
of the built environment on health, particularly research emphasizing the potential of broad-based 
community-level interventions.48 By understanding the ways these problems are rooted in the his-
tory of the urban context, local offi  cials, communities, and citizens can begin to creatively address 
their causes and seek solutions that do not increase dependence on outside forces.51
STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE THE URBAN FOOD ENVIRONMENT
Th e upstream determinants of healthy urbanization include stimulation of job creation, land 
tenure and land use policy, transportation, sustainable urban development, social protection, 
settlement policies and strategies, community empowerment, vulnerability reduction, and bet-
ter security among others.28 However, the urban food environment has its challenges in off ering 
aff ordable, accessible healthy foods. Policy-makers and public health practitioners are aware of 
these challenges and the complexities surrounding urbanization. Considering these issues, there 
have been strategies to improve the availability, aff ordability, and accessibility of healthy foods in 
urban areas.
Urban agriculture initiatives increase the availability of healthy foods. Community gar-
dens and urban farms are growing trends in urban neighborhoods. Community organizations, 
churches, and even vacant lots have developed space to allow for urban agriculture. Urban park 
organizations have started garden programs for residents to build gardening skills and provide 
space to grow their food. Farmers’ markets and mobile produce carts can locate themselves in 
areas with limited healthy food availability. Healthy retail interventions, such as the Healthy 
Corner Store Initiatives, allow for public–private partnerships to increase the availability of 
healthy foods in small grocers by providing fi nancial incentives and technical assistance to retail 
owners to accommodate perishable and healthy foods including grants for refrigeration units and 
reconfi guring fl oor design to optimize product placement.18
Local policies are sustainable strategies to improve equitable food access and aff ordability. 
Land use zoning stipulates land parcels for specifi ed uses. Local municipalities can identify some 
land uses for urban agriculture. For example, transitional zoning off ers a strategy to transform 
vacant lots to community gardens. Healthy Food Zoning is a land use policy that limits the siting 
of unhealthy food retailers within proximity to vulnerable population groups, oft en youth. For 
example, healthy food zoning may limit dollar stores or fast-food restaurants locating near schools.
Economic policies are oft en used to incentivize development in blighted areas. For example, 
Tax Increment Financing (TIF) allows for special tax districts in which a portion of tax revenue 
is allocated for redevelopment (i.e., rent caps, rent-controlled apartments). As mentioned earlier, 
this may lead to gentrifi cation, thus exacerbating problems of healthy food access and aff ordability 
to low-income and minority population groups. However, thoughtful policies can institute pro-
tections toward low-resource or economically disadvantaged neighborhoods. Figure 9.7 depicts 
SNAP-authorized food retailers in a midsize city. It demonstrates the density of unhealthy food 
retailers, convenience stores, discount variety stores (e.g., dollar stores), and pharmacies.
Financial institutions combine private funds with federal dollars to support blighted areas with 
resources and innovative programs. Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) 
can provide capital fi nancing to support healthy food retail in low-income urban neighborhoods. 


===PAGE 237===
212 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Healthy Food Financing Initiative is a public–private partnership leveraging public funds to sup-
port local food retailers to increase the availability and aff ordability of healthy foods. Th is can be 
through partnerships with SNAP- or WIC-authorized farmers’ markets by increasing the value of 
their public benefi ts for the purchase of fresh fruits and vegetables.
FIGURE 9.7 Map of SNAP-authorized food retailers in a midsize city in the United States.
SNAP, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.
Source: From © OpenStreetMap contributors. Map available by CC BY-SA License (www.openstreetmap.org/copyright).
Greenville
Greenville
Memorial
Memorial
Hospital
Hospital
Haywood
Haywood
Mall
Mall
GCC -
GCC -
Chanticleer
Chanticleer
GCC -
GCC -
Riverside
Riverside
Woodruff Rd
Woodruff Rd
Woodruff Rd
Woodruff Rd
Bob
Bob
Jones
Jones
University
University
Greenville
Greenville
Dowentown
Dowentown
Airport
Airport
385
Haywoo
d
 
R
d
Haywoo
d
 
R
d
Discount Variety
Discount Variety
Sterling
Sterling
School
School
Zoo
Zoo
Laurens Rd
Laurens Rd
Wade Hampton Blvd
Wade Hampton Blvd
Main St
Main St
Poinsett Hwy
Poinsett Hwy
rea
rea
N Pleasantburg Dr
N Pleasantburg Dr
E P
a
rk
i
n
s 
Mill 
R
d
Lau
re
n
Ri
d
g
e 
Rd
C
l
e
v
e
l
a
n
d
 
S
t
 
E
xt
Clev
e
l
a
n
d
 
S
t
A
ug
usta
 Rd
A
ug
usta
 Rd
S
 
W
a
s
h
i
n
gton Ave
S Acade
m
y
 
S
t
Acad
e
m
y
 
S
t 
N
C
hu
rc
h
 
S
t
Wood
si
d
e Ave
W 
Bl
u
e
Ridge
 Dr
W
 P
arker
 R
d
C
e
d
a
r 
L
a
ne Rd
Pete 
H
o
l
l
i
s
 
B
lv
d
Eastay Br
idg
e
 Rd
W F
a
ris
 Rd 
M
o
h
a
w
k
 
D
r
C
hi
c
k S
p
r
ing
s
 
Rd
R
ut
herf
ord R
d
N Fr
ank
lin 
Rd
Su
lph
ur
 
S
prings Rd
La
n
g
s
t
o
n 
C
r
e
e
k
Old Buncomb
e 
R
d
Little 
C
r
e
ek
P
in
ey
 
M
o
u
nt
a
i
n
 
R
d
N
 
Pl
ea
santb
ur
g
 
D
r
Pied
m
ont P
a
r
k
 Rd
Ruther
fo
rd 
R
d
W
ad
dell
 
R
d
Chero
k
e
e Dr
E
d
w
a
r
ds 
R
d
Ho
we
ll 
R
d
 
L
a
u
ral C
r
e
e
k
P
e
l
h
a
m
 R
d
V
ar
das
P
a
r
k
i
n
s
 
Mi
ll
 
R
d
Jac
ob
s
 
R
d
Miller Ave
Miller Ave
Guess St
Guess St
Pendleton St
Pendleton St
S Church St
S Church St
B
r
u
sh
y
 
C
re
ek
S
 Mai
n
 
S
t
Long Branch
Old Bunco
m
b
e
 
R
d
E L
E L
W Lee Rd
W Lee Rd
Wade Hampton Blvd
Wade Hampton Blvd
E North St
E North St
State
 
P
a
rk 
R
d
Sterling
Sterling
School
School
Zoo
Zoo
Laurens Rd
Laurens Rd
Wade Hampton Blvd
Wade Hampton Blvd
Main St
Main St
Poinsett Hwy
Poinsett Hwy
rea
rea
N Pleasantburg Dr
N Pleasantburg Dr
E P
a
rk
i
n
s 
Mill 
R
d
Lau
re
n
Ri
d
g
e 
Rd
C
l
e
v
e
l
a
n
d
 
S
t
 
E
xt
Clev
e
l
a
n
d
 
S
t
S
 
W
a
s
h
i
n
gton Ave
S Acade
m
y
 
S
t
Acad
e
m
y
 
S
t 
N
C
hu
rc
h
 
S
t
Wood
si
d
e Ave
W 
Bl
u
e
Ridge
 Dr
W
 P
arker
 R
d
C
e
d
a
r 
L
a
ne Rd
Pete 
H
o
l
l
i
s
 
B
lv
d
Eastay Br
idg
e
 Rd
W F
a
ris
 Rd 
M
o
h
a
w
k
 
D
r
C
hi
c
k S
p
r
ing
s
 
Rd
R
ut
herf
ord R
d
N Fr
ank
lin 
Rd
Su
lph
ur
 
S
prings Rd
La
n
g
s
t
o
n 
C
r
e
e
k
Old Buncomb
e 
R
d
Little 
C
r
e
ek
P
in
ey
 
M
o
u
nt
a
i
n
 
R
d
N
 
Pl
ea
santb
ur
g
 
D
r
Pied
m
ont P
a
r
k
 Rd
Ruther
fo
rd 
R
d
W
ad
dell
 
R
d
Chero
k
e
e Dr
E
d
w
a
r
ds 
R
d
Ho
we
ll 
R
d
 
L
a
u
ral C
r
e
e
k
P
e
l
h
a
m
 R
d
V
ar
das
P
a
r
k
i
n
s
 
Mil
l 
R
d
Jac
ob
s
 
R
d
Miller Ave
Miller Ave
Hwy
Hwy
Hwy
Hwy
Guess St
Guess St
Pendleton St
Pendleton St
S Church St
S Church St
B
r
u
sh
y
 
C
re
ek
S
 Mai
n
 
S
t
Long Branch
Old Bunco
m
b
e
 
R
d
E L
E L
W Lee Rd
W Lee Rd
Wade Hampton Blvd
Wade Hampton Blvd
E North St
E North St
State
 
P
a
rk 
R
d
1 MIles
0
N
1
0.5
123
276
276
81
20
183
291
253
253
SNAP Retailers
Retail_Type
Convenience and Gas
Welcome
Welcome
Welcome
Farmers’ Market
Grocery
Pharmacy
Specialty Food
Supermarket
29
291
25
25
29
294
276
85
Greenville
Greenville
Sans Souci
Sans Souci
Greenville
Sans Souci
25


===PAGE 238===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
213
Urban Agriculture Initiatives
Community agriculture and conservation initiatives have become essential components of sustain-
able community development strategies, particularly in urban areas and low-income neighbor-
hoods.52 Th ese initiatives can include community gardens, regional food distribution hubs, zoning 
for urban agriculture to support food entrepreneurs, food systems in city comprehensive plans, 
and creation of a healthy retail initiative to promote the availability of healthy, aff ordable foods in 
small grocers (i.e., Health Corner Store Initiative). Community gardens are an increasingly pop-
ular form of community agriculture, commonly viewed as an eff ective community development 
tool in strengthening both individual and community assets.53 Prior studies indicated the potential 
of community gardens to revitalize neighborhoods, build social capital and political activism, and 
foster a sense of belonging and collective effi  cacy.54 Furthermore, motivations for participation 
in community gardening are usually driven by a desire to improve neighborhoods, enjoy nature, 
increase access to fresh food, and build healthier communities.55,56 Th e following is an analysis of 
the reasons why volunteers participate in community gardens and the environmental, economic, 
and social benefi ts of these programs for individual participants and hosting communities.
What Is a Community Garden?
According to Ferris, Norman, and Sempik, community gardens can be described as public enter-
prises where ownership, access, and democratic control are commonly shared in order to provide 
local food supplies while off ering opportunities for open space, greenery, and leisure and recre-
ational activities.57 Recent studies have switched from a purely environmental and economic per-
spective to highlight the importance of community gardens as common places of collective activities 
that serve a diverse range of social benefi ts. For example, Sassatelli emphasizes their role as cata-
lysts for creating more sustainable and ethical forms of living as well as community enrichment.58 
Cumbers, Shaw, Crossan, and McMaster gave emphasis to the potential for developing new ways of 
deriving place-based identity and community, and Wills pinpointed their role as active places bring-
ing diverse groups together to create new and more progressive social relations and diminishing 
racial tensions.59,60 A community-based defi nition described community gardens as a “process for 
responding to and nurturing neighborhood-based initiative through a nongovernmental intermedi-
ary organization where the defi ning characteristic is the engagement of the program benefi ciaries.”61
Community Gardens and Sustainable Development
Historically, in the United States, community gardens were initially designed to increase local 
food supplies during the World Wars and Great Depression.54 In the wake of gross shortages, pro-
grams such as the Victory Gardens Program implemented by the USDA produced approximately 
40% of the fresh vegetables in the country.52
For the past 70 years, community gardens have fl ourished and declined following the socio-
economic climate of the host communities. In the past few decades, sustainable community 
development strategies have integrated the use of community gardens as essential components to 
revitalize and sustain development in communities around the world. Holland studied how com-
munity gardens guided the development, evolution, and expansion of local sustainability eff orts.62 
Th e outcomes of Holland’s study showed that gardens were all connected through a sense of com-
munity participation, and that also provided all three mechanisms to achieve sustainable com-
munities by addressing economic, social, and environmental issues. Today, community activists, 


===PAGE 239===
214 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
public health workers, and planners praise community gardens as a critical urban–rural partner-
ship yielding a myriad of social, economic, environmental, and health benefi ts.63
Citizen Participation and Collective Effi cacy in Community Gardens
Citizen participation can be described as the active, voluntary involvement of individuals and 
groups to modify challenging conditions in their communities and to infl uence the policies and 
programs that aff ect the quality of their lives.64 For the past few decades, citizen participation has 
augmented the eff ectiveness of community-based social work strategies by strengthening indi-
vidual involvement in democratic processes and building community problem-solving resources 
and capacities.65 One of the most frequent challenges for citizen participation is the long-term 
involvement of individuals. Studies have shown that the majority of community garden programs 
depend heavily on the participation of their members, not only in terms of physical work and 
resources, but also in active involvement and time. Th erefore, it is imperative that individuals 
believe they have the capacity to make a diff erence.
Participation in the planning, development, and maintenance of a community garden can 
improve individuals’ abilities, opportunities, and relationships. An individual’s perception regard-
ing his or her ability to work with his or her neighbors to intervene in community issues to solve 
problems is called collective effi  cacy.66 Several studies have shown that community gardens pro-
vide the opportunity for place-based social processes that support collective effi  cacy and, conse-
quently, improve neighborhood conditions, promote health, and sense of belonging.67,68 Citizen 
participation in a community garden program can also strengthen the connection among neigh-
bors, commonly referred to as social integration or social capital.52
CONCLUSION
Urbanization is a global phenomenon, primarily driven by economic drivers such as job opportu-
nities and more services. However, the urban environment disproportionately aff ects vulnerable 
population groups with many SDOH such as poor housing conditions, segregated neighborhoods, 
and limited access to resources, including those that facilitate achieving a healthy diet. Diff erences 
in health are striking in communities with poor SDOH; and low-resource communities affl  icted 
by a myriad of SDOH are prevalent in urban settings across the globe. Living in food deserts, 
gentrifi cation, poverty, and many other SDOH hinder the capacity of low-income and minority 
urban residents to access healthy food options. Fortunately, researchers and practitioners are 
currently using ecological perspectives with the purpose of understanding the infl uence of the 
environment on the risk of developing health conditions associated with food consumption such 
as obesity and eating disorders. Th ese research and related programmatic eff orts are helping in 
identifying community-engaged and holistic strategies to promote healthier eating patterns in 
urban settings, particularly by demonstrating how the accumulation of risks across ecologies 
may account for compromised healthy development of children and families. Interventions to 
address a variety of factors at diff erent levels of the socio-ecological spectrum in urban settings 
are required. Th e design of these interventions should incorporate evidence on the infl uence of 
the built environment on health, emphasizing the potential of broad-based community-level 
interventions. By trying to depict how the urban context perpetuates the SDOH that determine 
poor health outcomes for low-income and minority individuals in urban settings, local offi  cials, 
communities, and citizens can begin to collaboratively address the factors that perpetuate poor 
nutritional patterns in urban settings.


===PAGE 240===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
215
KEY CONCEPTS
1. Urbanization and urban health: Urbanization is the population shift  from more rural 
areas to more urban areas, causing expansion of and population growth in cities. 
Much of this movement is due to economic drivers such as job opportunities and 
more services. Urban populations present diff ering health concerns than those in 
rural areas.
2. 
Healthy diet: Maintaining a healthy diet can be challenging to some population groups 
depending on their geographic area and socioeconomic status.
3. 
Urbanization and gentrifi cation: Urbanization is population movement from rural 
areas to more urban areas, causing an increase in population in cities and the expan-
sion of cities. Gentrifi cation is the change in neighborhood characteristics from 
low-income communities, oft en rife with crime, minority populations, and limited 
resources to the opposite of high-income households and nonminority population 
groups. Gentrifi cation results in the displacement of low-income residents following 
urban renewal or revitalization projects.
4. 
Food deserts: In urban areas, we oft en see “food deserts,” or the lack of a supermarket 
in low-income areas. Supermarkets are not likely to be in cities, but rather are more 
oft en found in the periphery or suburban areas. Food retailers located in cities oft en 
are smaller, with limited availability of healthy foods such as fresh fruits and vegetables 
and perishable items. Land costs are higher in urban areas resulting in higher leasing 
and rental costs for storeowners. Consequently, some of these costs are passed on to 
the consumer through higher food prices.
5. 
Availability in urban settings: Th ere are a limited number of supermarkets in urban 
areas, contributing to food deserts in low-income areas. Instead, small grocers, such 
as bodegas and corner stores, convenience/gas stores, pharmacies, and dollar stores 
are oft en the options available to urban households, especially for those with limited 
resources.
6. 
Access to food in urban settings: In regard to this topic, accessibility will focus on the 
ability to get to destinations via transportation. As population density increases, 
vehicle ownership decreases, and those with disabilities also have transportation dif-
fi culties. Public transit provides accessibility opportunities especially for older adults, 
those with low income, and those with disabilities. However, transit users have limited 
choices for supermarkets or grocery stores with limited stops to such food retailers. In 
addition, travel time is more likely to be longer, including multiple transfers to other 
routes in order to reach the destination. Transit users also need to factor travel costs 
and carrying groceries back to their home.
7. 
Aff ordability in urban settings: In terms of diet, there is a cost disparity between nutri-
ent-rich foods and less healthy food options. Lack of aff ordability of food contributes 
to food insecurity. Low income and poverty are associated with food insecurity, or 
reduced quality, variety, and desirability of diet with disrupted eating patterns.
8. 
Social determinants of health (SDOH): Research has shown that the health of a com-
munity is not determined only by its healthcare system, but it is also determined by 
access to social and economic opportunities; the resources and supports available in 
our households, neighborhoods, and communities; the quality of our schooling; the 


===PAGE 241===
216 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
safety of our workplaces; the cleanliness of our water, food, and air; and the nature of 
our social interactions and relationships. SDOH are conditions in the environments in 
which people are born, live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that aff ect a wide range 
of health, functioning, and quality-of-life outcomes and risks.
CASE STUDY 1: LIVEWELL GREENVILLE: MAINTAINING 
A HEALTHY COMMUNITY IN GREENVILLE COUNTY, 
SOUTH CAROLINA
LiveWell Greenville is a county-level initiative to create and maintain a healthy community 
through the promotion and support of policies, systems, and environments that make healthy 
choices viable to families and communities across Greenville County, South Carolina.69 Greenville 
County, South Carolina, has an estimated population of 498,766; 24.2% are younger than 18 years; 
76.7% are White; 18.6% are African American; the median household income in 2012–2016 was 
$52,595; and 15.2% of the population lives below the FPL.70 Greenville County has one of the 
highest obesity rates in the nation, with 66% of adults and 41% of youth being overweight or 
obese. Without providing adequate access to healthy eating and active living, the overall health of 
this community will continue to decline.69
LiveWell Greenville has become the primary vehicle through which partner organizations can 
successfully promote positive change in the county. A coalition supports schools, neighborhoods, 
businesses, and other areas of the community through resources, collaboration, and evaluation 
to promote healthy eating and active living.69 Th e healthy eating and active living strategies of 
the LiveWell Greenville partnership include three overarching initiatives (Figure 9.8), which are 
active transportation, access to healthy food, and nutrition and physical activity standards in 
aft er-school settings.71 Th e active transportation improvement initiative aims at increasing bicycle 
and pedestrian access, including physical changes to streets, construction of trails, installation of 
wayfi nding signage, and development of bike storage stations. Th e access to healthy food initiative 
pursues increasing access to aff ordable and nutritious produce through the implementation of a 
farmers’ market and mobile market in communities with limited access to fresh produce. Th e 
nutrition and physical activity initiative aims at increasing policy and environment standards for 
healthy eating and active living in Out of School Time centers.
LiveWell Greenville is one of 49 community partnerships across the United States that 
received grants from the Healthy Kids, Healthy Communities (HKHC) national program, 
funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF), with the goal of preventing child-
hood obesity. Th e program placed special emphasis on reaching children at highest risk for obe-
sity based on race, ethnicity, income, or geographic location.71 Eff orts to develop the LiveWell 
Greenville coalition in Greenville county included partnership and capacity-building strategies 
such as formal retreats and training (over 80 community members and stakeholders), commu-
nity change agents (the Sterling Land Trust Board, the Nicholtown Neighborhood Association, 
and Russell Community Church), and community advisory committees (adult and youth plan-
ning committees).
LiveWell Greenville’s overarching strategy is to infl uence SDOH in the county including the 
following: crime, obesity, access to healthy foods, and public transportation.71 In relation to access 
to healthy foods, South Carolina has a lower number of healthy food retailers compared to the 
national average. According to the Nutrition Environment Measures Survey (NEMS), the city 


===PAGE 242===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
217
FIGURE 9.8 Levels of impact of LiveWell Greenville in accordance with the socio-ecological 
framework.
Source: From Powers A. Live Well Greenville: Making the Healthy Choice the Easy Choice. Greenville Health System; 
2014. http://scholarexchange.furman.edu/records-ghs/3
Local infrastructure
greenville
Peer pressure
role models
support systems
Knowledge
attitudes
beliefs
Schools
places of worship
workplaces
Marketing
governmental policies
social norms
food availability,
pricing, and quality
Park accessibility
and quality
Individual
Interpersonal
Organizational
Community
Societal
www.livewellgreeville.org
Levels of Impact
of Greenville has only six grocery stores, while there are 69 fast casual restaurants, 57 fast-food 
restaurants, and 97 sit-down restaurants.
Access to healthy food related statistics were generated by the LiveWell Greenville coalition 
by conducting assessments to better understand access to healthy foods using the NEMS. Th e 
NEMS was completed in May 2010 for all food establishments in Greenville County and each 
municipality to defi ne food desert areas near adult and youth residents. Reports and maps 
were used within the communities to assist with advocating for changes in the food environ-
ment. Th e County Planning Department developed maps identifying food stores. Additional 
NEMSs were completed in December 2012. In addition to the surveys, a food policy scan was 
conducted in fall 2012 by reviewing existing ordinances and codes for various cities in the state 
of South Carolina. Other assessments included healthy vending assessments and price com-
parison assessments. A mobile food-vending project was conducted to better understand how 
Greenville could formulate and implement a policy encouraging the operation of food trucks. 
A Healthy Eating and Activity Standards in Out of School Time assessment was conducted 
in 2012 to understand healthy eating and physical activity standards in Out of School Time 
centers.71
Findings from the diff erent assessments conducted by the LiveWell coalition were used to 
promote population reach and impact related activities including the development of commu-
nity gardens and mobile markets that were targeted toward residents in three prioritized neigh-
borhoods. In 2012, a 2-acre community garden located in one of these neighborhoods produced 
approximately 2,000 pounds of food (e.g., collards, okra, asparagus, mustard salad, sweet pota-
toes, turnip greens), which was distributed free to volunteers, older adults, and residents with 
disabilities. Some of the challenges identifi ed in one of the community gardens included low 
participation and lack of community buy-in. Moreover, relationship building was needed owing 


===PAGE 243===
218 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
to distrust among one community and a local faith-based organization. Another relevant strat-
egy implemented as part of the LiveWell Greenville initiative was the Nutrition and Physical 
Activity Standards in Child Care. As part of this strategy, the City of Greenville instituted a pol-
icy change incorporating healthy snacks in all city-sponsored aft er-school programs in 2012.71
Kemper and colleagues conducted a study to determine changes in nutrition and physical 
activity environments, policies, and practices among 37 aft er-school programs aft er their par-
ticipation in the LiveWell Greenville Aft erschool Initiative.72 Th e study used a nonexperimen-
tal, pre- and postsurvey design. Th e survey was based on the Nutrition and Physical Activity 
Self-Assessment for Child Care questionnaire and modifi ed for aft er-school settings. A 9-month 
intervention consisted of program staff  members completing the preassessment and goal-setting 
worksheet, receiving technical support and training from LiveWell Greenville staff , attending net-
working meetings about nutrition and physical activity promotion strategies, and completing a 
postassessment. Findings of this study showed that the LiveWell Greenville Aft erschool Initiative, 
which involved self-assessment, goal setting, and technical support, is a successful strategy to 
change nutrition and physical activity environments in aft er-school settings.73 Th rough empirical 
research and formative and summative evaluations, the LiveWell Greenville initiative has pro-
vided evidence of the positive impact on community’s health and well-being of implementing 
holistic and socio-ecological approaches to healthy communities that address SDOH in vulnera-
ble urban communities in the United States.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Healthier community initiatives require the promotion and support of policies, sys-
tems, and environments that make healthy choices viable to families and communities. 
What could be two examples of policies and two examples of systems and environ-
ments you would target for modifi cation and/or development with the purpose of 
promoting healthier lifestyles at the county level in the United States?
2. 
Community-based participatory research (CBPR) is a collaborative approach to 
research that has been useful in working with disadvantaged communities to reduce 
health disparities. Th rough CBPR, communities have been directly involved in cultur-
ally competent research and interventions. Eff orts to develop the LiveWell Greenville 
coalition in Greenville County incorporated partnership and capacity-building strat-
egies, including formal retreats and training, community change agents, and commu-
nity advisory committees. Do you believe that the aforementioned partnership and 
capacity-building strategies and groups were suffi  cient to foster a CBPR process that 
accounts for a meaningful participation of most relevant stakeholders in Greenville 
County? Do you think that Greenville County residents of all ages, race–ethnicity, reli-
gion, physical condition, and so on had the same opportunity to have been represented 
into these programmatic groups? Would you use the same strategies and groups for a 
similar initiative? If not, what would you do diff erently?
3. 
Th e LiveWell Greenville initiative is framed within the SEM of health and incorporates 
a holistic and interdisciplinary approach to promote healthier communities through 
partnerships and collaborations. Identify three elements of this initiative that refl ect its 
socio-ecological perspective, and explain how these three elements refl ect this initiative.


===PAGE 244===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
219
CASE STUDY 2: PROGRAMS AND COLLABORATIVES FOR 
IMPROVING AFFORDABLE HEALTHY FOOD ACCESS 
IN SAN DIEGO COUNTY, CALIFORNIA
San Diego County in California understood the challenges of healthy living when there are lim-
ited healthy food options. With multiple interagency partnerships, there have been a variety 
of changes to improve aff ordable, healthy food access. Th rough the Fresh Food Fund, families 
and residents participating in SNAP, WIC, and Supplemental Security Income have been able to 
receive $20 matching funds for every $20 spent at the local farmers’ markets for fruits and vegeta-
bles. In addition, the San Diego Unifi ed School District implemented a Farm-to-School program 
for school lunches, which provided fresh, local food to San Diego students, including access to a 
salad bar. Further, the city of San Diego amended their costly permitting and zoning restrictions 
to allow for community gardens. Th e San Diego Food System Alliance is a multisector collabo-
rative aimed at improving food security and healthy food access through a systems-level change 
strategy by coordinating and collaborating with local partners to address urban agriculture, local 
food procurement, and food waste recovery.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Th e interventions implemented in San Diego required coordination and collaboration 
from multiple partners from various sectors. Some of these required changes in policy 
and procurement. In addressing healthy good access through urban agriculture strate-
gies from a socio-ecological perspective, what type of sectors, agencies, and organiza-
tions would be part of such collaborative eff orts?
2. 
San Diego’s Fresh Food Fund allowed eligible families to increase their purchasing 
power for healthy, fresh foods. What are the challenges to this program and how would 
you address those challenges?
3. 
Th e San Diego Unifi ed School District implemented a Farm-to-School program. 
Encouraging children to eat fresh fruits and vegetables as part of a regular diet may be 
quite the feat. What are some strategies to motivate and introduce children to eating 
fresh fruits and vegetables, especially with respect to what may be available in a salad 
bar?
4. 
San Diego County has a climate that aff ords a year-round growing season. How might 
cities in other climates address and support urban agriculture?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
Visit USDA MyPlate site for interactive engagement of dietary guidelines for specifi c 
dietary restrictions or medical conditions (i.e., type 2 diabetes, vegan diet): www.
choosemyplate.gov/dietary-guidelines.
2. 
Visit the USDA Food Access Research Atlas to engage in an interactive map: www.ers.
usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research-atlas.


===PAGE 245===
220 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What is the role of urbanization in shaping nutritional patterns among low-income 
minority populations?
2. 
In what ways do food deserts and/or food swamps infl uence the nutritional status of 
low-income minority populations in urban settings?
3. 
What are some of the most relevant social determinants of nutritional health in urban 
settings?
4. 
You have been assigned to identify ways to improve the nutritional status of chil-
dren and adolescents at a school setting by using a socio-ecological approach. Please 
describe the policies and programs you would recommend for achieving this goal. 
Which factors, and at which levels of the SEM, are you going to target to achieve your 
proposed goals?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
 
■
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is responsible for providing a safety net 
for millions of Americans who are food-insecure and for developing and promot-
ing dietary guidance based on scientifi c evidence. Th e USDA works to increase 
food security and reduce hunger by providing children and low-income people 
access to food, a healthful diet, and nutrition education in a way that supports 
American agriculture and inspires public confi dence. Th e Center for Nutrition 
Policy and Promotion (CNPP) is responsible for developing and promoting dietary 
guidance that links the best evidence-based scientifi c research to the nutrition 
needs of Americans (USDA Child Nutrition Programs: www.usda.gov/topics/
food-and-nutrition).
 
■
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Division of Nutrition, 
Physical Activity, and Obesity protects the health of Americans at every stage of 
life by encouraging regular physical activity, good nutrition, and healthy weight. 
Th rough its support of state and community partners, it provides data, programs 
that work, and practical tools so that Americans have the best possible chance to 
achieve healthier lives and avoid chronic diseases (Center for Chronic Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and 
Obesity at a Glance: www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag/
dnpao.htm).
 
■
Th e National Alliance for Nutrition and Activity (NANA) advocates national poli-
cies and programs to promote healthy eating and physical activity to help reduce the 
illnesses, diseases, disabilities, premature deaths, and costs associated with diet and 
inactivity. Its eff orts include advocating for strong public policy and program funding, 
supporting eff ective education programs, and promoting environmental approaches to 
help the public eat better and be more active (Center for Science in the Public Interest, 
National Alliance for Nutrition and Activity: cspinet.org/protecting-our-health/
nutrition/national-alliance-nutrition-and-activity).
 
■
Th e Food Tank: To counteract unhealthy nutritional messaging, many organizations 
around the globe are working to instill healthy eating habits, foster food literacy, teach 


===PAGE 246===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
221
culinary skills, and educate children about the environmental, social, and health conse-
quences of their food choices. Food Tank has selected 35 particularly noteworthy pro-
grams (Food Tank, 35 Food Education Organizations: foodtank.com/news/2016/09/
thirty-fi ve-food-education-organizations).
 
■
Th e Agatston Urban Nutrition Initiative (AUNI) was developed from an ABCS 
course taught by Francis Johnston, Professor of Anthropology, in 1991. It was cre-
ated to help build and sustain healthy communities by promoting nutrition edu-
cation, food access and sovereignty, and physical fi tness in West Philadelphia 
(Th e Barbara and Edward Netter Center for Community Partnerships, Agatston 
Urban Nutrition Initiative: www.nettercenter.upenn.edu/what-we-do/programs/
university-assisted-community-schools/agatston-urban-nutrition-initiative).
GLOSSARY
Community garden: Any piece of land gardened by a group of people, utilizing either individ-
ual or shared plots on private or public land.
Food desert: Geographic areas with low-income census tracts (i.e., geographically defi ned 
 areas determined by the U.S. Bureau of the Census and which are equivalent to neighborhoods) 
and no supermarket within 1 mile.
Food insecurity: Th e state of being without reliable access to a suffi  cient quantity of aff ordable, 
nutritious food.
Food swamp: Describes a geographic location that has a high concentration of businesses that 
sell “junk food” (high-calorie, low-nutrition food) more so than healthier food outlets.
Food system: A complex web of activities involving production, processing, transport, and 
consumption. Issues concerning the food system include the governance and economics of 
food production, its sustainability, the degree to which we waste food, how food production 
aff ects the natural environment, and the impact of food on individual and population health.
Gentrifi cation: Th e change in neighborhood characteristics from low-income communities, 
oft en rife with crime, minority populations, and limited resources, to the opposite of high- 
income households and nonminority population groups.
Social determinants of health (SDOH): Conditions in the environments in which people are 
born, live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that aff ect a wide range of health, functioning, 
and quality-of-life outcomes and risks.
Socio-ecological perspectives: Contribute with the understanding about the infl uence of the 
environment on the risk of developing health conditions.
Toxic environment: A multidisciplinary fi eld of science concerned with the study of the harm-
ful eff ects of various chemical, biological, and physical agents on living organisms.
Urban agriculture: Th e growing of plants and the raising of animals within and around cities.
Urbanization: Th e population shift  from more rural areas to more urban areas, causing ex-
pansion of and population growth in cities. Much of this movement is due to economic drivers 
such as job opportunities and more services.


===PAGE 247===
222 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
REFERENCES
1. Leviton LC, Snell E, McGinnis M. Urban issues in health promotion strategies. Am J Public Health. 
2000;90:863–866. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.6.863
2. Corburn J. Urban place and health equity: critical issues and practices. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2017;14:E117. doi:10.3390/ijerph14020117
3. Cohen N. Feeding or Starving Gentrifi cation: Th e Role of Food Policy. New York, NY: CUNY Urban Food 
Policy Institute. 2018. https://www.cunyurbanfoodpolicy.org/news/2018/3/27/feeding-or-starving-
gentrifi cation-the-role-of-food-policy
4. Cohen MJ, Garrett JL. Th e food price crisis and urban food (in) security. Environ Urban. 2010;22:467–
482. doi:10.1177/0956247810380375
5. Caspi CE, Pelletier JE, Harnack L, et al. Diff erences in healthy food supply and stocking practices between 
small grocery stores, gas-marts, pharmacies and dollar stores. Public Health Nutr. 2016;19(3):540–547. 
doi:10.1017/S1368980015002724
6. Lind PL, Jensen PV, Glumer C, Toft  U. Th e association between accessibility of local convenience stores 
and unhealthy diet. Eur J Public Health. 2016;26:634–639. doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckv242
7. Cooksey-Stowers K, Schwartz M, Brownell K. Food swamps predict obesity rates better than food 
deserts in the United States. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;11:1366. doi:10.3390/ijerph14111366
8. Khan LK, Sobush K, Keener D, et al. Recommended community strategies and measurements to prevent 
obesity in the United States. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2009;58(RR-7):1–26.
9. Blumenberg E, Pierce G. Automobile ownership and travel by the poor: evidence from the 2009 National 
Household Travel Survey. Transp Res Rec. 2012;2320:28–36. doi:10.3141/2320-04
10. Durant S. Transportation Diffi  culties Keep Over Half a Million Disabled at Home. Washington, DC: 
Bureau of Transportation Statistics; 2003.
11. Ver Ploeg M, Larimore E, Wilde PE. Th e Infl uence of Food Store Access on Grocery Shopping and Food 
Spending. 2017. https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/85442/eib-180.pdf
12. Martinez JC, Clark JM, Gudzune KA. Association of personal vehicle access with lifestyle habits 
and food insecurity among public housing residents. Prev Med Rep. 2019;13:341–345. doi:10.1016/
j.pmedr.2019.01.001
13. Murphy M, Koohsari MJ, Badland H, Giles-Corti B. Supermarket access, transport mode and BMI: 
the potential for urban design and planning policy across socio-economic areas. Public Health Nutr. 
2017;20:3304–3315. doi:10.1017/S1368980017002336
14. Hossfeld L, Kelly B, Waity J, eds. (2018). Food and Poverty: Food Insecurity and Food Sovereignty Among 
America’s Poor. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University; 2018.
15. Monsivais P, Mclain J, Drewnowski A. Th e rising disparity in the price of healthful foods: 2004–2008. 
Food Policy. 2010;35:514–520. doi:10.1016/j.foodpol.2010.06.004
16. Drewnowski A, Rolls BJ. Obesity Treatment and Prevention: New Directions. Basel, Switzerland: Karger 
Medical and Scientifi c Publishers; 2012.
17. Caspi CE, Pelletier JE, Harnack LJ, et al. Pricing of staple foods at supermarkets versus small food stores. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14:E915. doi:10.3390/ijerph14080915
18. Hossfeld L, Kelly B, Waity J. Solutions to the social problem of food insecurity in the United States. In: 
Muschert G, Klocke B, Perucci R, Shefner J, eds. Agenda for Social Justice: Solutions for 2016. Bristol, 
UK: Policy Press; 2016.
19. McGinnis JM, Williams-Russo P, Knickman JR. Th e case for more active policy attention to health 
promotion. Health Aff  (Millwood). 2002;21:78–93. doi:10.1377/hlthaff .21.2.78
20. Institute of Medicine. Disparities in Health Care: Methods for Studying the Eff ects of Race, Ethnicity, and 
SES on Access, Use, and Quality of Health Care. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2002.
21. Mackenbach JP. Th e contribution of medical care to mortality decline: McKeown revisited. J Clin 
Epidemiol. 1996;49:1207–1213. doi:10.1016/S0895-4356(96)00200-4
22. McGinnis JM, Foege WH. Actual causes of death in the United States. JAMA. 1993;270:2207–2212. 
doi:10.1001/jama.1993.03510180077038
23. Mackenbach JP, Stronks K, Kunst AE. Th e contribution of medical care to inequalities in health: 
diff erences between socio-economic groups in decline of mortality from conditions amenable to 
medical intervention. Soc Sci Med. 1989;29:369–376. doi:10.1016/0277-9536(89)90285-2


===PAGE 248===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
223
24. Braveman P, Gottlieb L. Th e social determinants of health: it’s time to consider the causes of the causes. 
Public Health Rep. 2014;129(suppl 2):19–31. doi:10.1177/00333549141291S206
25. Solar O, Irwin A. A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. Social 
Determinants of Health Discussion Paper 2 (Policy and Practice). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2010.
26. Lovell N, Bibby J. What Makes Us Healthy? An Introduction to the Social Determinants of Health. London, 
UK: Health Foundation; 2018:1–61.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Social Determinants of Health: Know what aff ects health. 
2018. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/index.htm 
28. Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Closing the Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Th rough 
Action on the Social Determinants of Health. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2008. 
https://www.who.int/social_determinants/en
29. Anderson ES, Winett RA, Wojcik JR. Self-regulation, self-effi  cacy, outcome expectations, and social 
support: social cognitive theory and nutrition behavior. Ann Behav Med. 2007;34(3):304–312. 
doi:10.1007/BF02874555
30. World Health Organization. Our Cities, Our Health, Our Future: Toward Action on Social Determinants 
of Health in Urban Settings. A synopsis of the report of the knowledge network on urban settings to 
the WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Kobe, Japan: WHO Centre for Health 
Development; 2008.
31. Gordon-Larsen P, Nelson MC, Page P, Popkin BM. Inequality in the built environment underlies key 
health disparities in physical activity and obesity. Pediatrics. 2006;117:417–424. doi:10.1542/peds.2005
-0058
32. Cummins S, Macintyre S. Food environments and obesity—neighborhood or nation? Int J Epidemiol. 
2006;35:100–104. doi:10.1093/ije/dyi276
33. Asfour L, Huang S, Ocasio MA, et al. Association between socio-ecological risk factor clustering and 
mental, emotional, and behavioral problems in Hispanic adolescents. J Child Fam Stud. 2017;26:1266–
1273. doi:10.1007/s10826-016-0641-0
34. Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. Am Psychol. 
1977;32:513–531.doi:10.1037/0003-066x.32.7.513
35. Bronfenbrenner U. Ecological systems theory. In: Bronfenbrenner U, ed. Making Human Beings Human: 
Bioecological Perspectives on Human Development. Th ousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2005:106–
173.
36. Gardiner HW. Lives Across Cultures: Cross-Cultural Human Development. New York, NY: Pearson; 
2018:14.
37. Birch LL, Anzman SL. Learning to eat in an obesogenic environment: a developmental systems perspec-
tive on childhood obesity. Child Dev Perspect. 2010;4:138–143. doi:10.1111/j.1750-8606.2010.00132.x
38. Neumark-Sztainer D. Preventing the broad spectrum of weight-related problems: working with parents 
to help teens achieve a healthy weight and positive body image. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2005;37:S133–S139. 
doi:10.1016/S1499-4046(06)60214-5
39. Fiese BH, Jones BL. Food and family: a socio-ecological perspective for child development. Adv Child 
Dev Behav. 2012;42:307–337. doi:10.1016/b978-0-12-394388-0.00009-5
40. Harrison K, Bost KK, McBride BA, et al. Toward a developmental conceptualization of contributors to 
overweight and obesity in childhood: the Six-C’s model. Child Dev Perspect. 2011;5:50–58. doi:10.1111/
j.1750-8606.2010.00150.x
41. Robinson T. Applying the Socio-ecological Model to improving fruit and vegetable intake among low-
income African Americans. J Community Health. 2008;33:395–406. doi:10.1007/s10900-008-9109-5
42. Moore SN, Murphy S, Moore L. Health improvement, nutrition-related behaviour and the role of school 
meals: the usefulness of a socio-ecological perspective to inform policy design, implementation and 
evaluation. Crit Public Health. 2011;21:441–454. doi:10.1080/09581596.2011.620604
43. Townsend N, Foster C. Developing and applying a socio-ecological model to the promotion of healthy 
eating in the school. Public Health Nutr. 2011;16:1101–1108. doi:10.1017/S1368980011002655
44. Moore L, de Silva-Sanigorski A, Moore SN. A socio-ecological perspective on behavioural interventions 
to infl uence food choice in schools: alternative, complementary or synergistic? Public Health Nutr. 
2013;16:1000–1005. doi:10.1017/S1368980012005605


===PAGE 249===
224 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
45. American Diabetes Association. Facts About Type 2 Diabetes. 2015. http://www.diabetes.org/diabetes
-basics/type-2/facts-about-type-2.html?loc=db-slabnav
46. Ziemer DC, Berkowitz KJ, Panayioto RM, et al. A simple meal plan emphasizing healthy food choices is 
as eff ective as an exchange-based meal plan for urban African Americans with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 
Care. 2003;26:1719–1724. doi:10.2337/diacare.26.6.1719
47. Th orndike AN, Riis J, Sonnenberg LM, Levy DE. Traffi  c-light labels and choice architecture: promoting 
healthy food choices. Am J Prev Med. 2014;46:143–149. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2013.10.002
48. Salois MJ. Obesity and diabetes, the built environment, and the ‘local’ food economy in the United 
States. Econ Hum Biol. 2012;10:35–42. doi:10.1016/j.ehb.2011.04.001
49. Smoyer-Tomic KE, Spence JC, Amrhein C. Food deserts in the prairies? Supermarket accessibility 
and neighborhood need in Edmonton, Canada. Prof Geogr. 2006;58:307–326. doi:10.1111/j.1467
-9272.2006.00570.x
50. Eisenhauer E. In poor health: supermarket redlining and urban nutrition. E Geo J. 2001;53:125–133. 
doi:10.1023/A:1015772503007
51. Ghosh-Dastidar B, Cohen D, Hunter G, et al. Distance to store, food prices, and obesity in urban food 
deserts. Am J Prev Med. 2014;47:587–595. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2014.07.005
52. Ohmer ML, Meadowcroft  P, Freed K, Lewis E. Community gardening and community development: 
individual, social and community benefi ts of a community conservation program. J Community Pract. 
2009;17:377–399. doi:10.1080/10705420903299961
53. Jones L. Improving health, building community: exploring the asset building potential of community 
gardens. Evans Sch Rev. 2012;2:66–84. doi:10.7152/esr.v2i1.13732
54. Saldivar-Tanaka L, Krasny ME. Culturing community development, neighborhood open space, and civic 
agriculture: the case of Latino community gardens in New York City. Agr Hum Values. 2004;21:399–412.
55. Schumacher JR, Lanier JA, Calvert K. Fostering community health through community gardens. J Acad 
Nutr Diet. 2014;114:A88. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2014.06.296
56. Andersson E, Barthel S, Ahrné K. Measuring social–ecological dynamics behind the generation of 
ecosystem services. Ecol Appl. 2007;17:1267–1278. doi:10.1890/06-1116.1
57. Ferris J, Norman C, Sempik J. People, land and sustainability: community gardens and the social 
dimension of sustainable development. Soc Policy Adm. 2001;35:559–568. doi:10.1111/1467-9515.t01-
1-00253
58. Sassatelli R. Consumer culture, sustainability and a new vision of consumer sovereignty. Sociol Ruralis. 
2015;55:483–496. doi:10.1111/soru.12081
59. Cumbers A, Shaw D, Crossan J, McMaster R. Th e work of community gardens: reclaiming place for 
community in the City. Work Employ Soc. 2018;32:133–149. doi:10.1177/0950017017695042
60. Wills J. Place and politics. In Featherstone D, Painter J, eds. Spatial Politics: Essays for Doreen Massey. 
Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2013:133–145.
61. Tranel M, Handlin LB Jr. Metromorphosis: documenting change. J Urban Aff , 2006;28:151–167. 
doi:10.1111/j.0735-2166.2006.00265.x
62. Holland L. Diversity and connections in community gardens: a contribution to local sustainability. 
Local Environ. 2004;9:285–305. doi:10.1080/1354983042000219388
63. Kearney SC. Th e Community Garden as a Tool for Community Empowerment: A Study of Community 
Gardens in Hampden County (master's thesis). Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts; 2009:361. 
64. Gamble DN, Weil MO. Citizen participation. Encycl Soc Work. 1995;1:483–494.
65. Ohmer M, Beck E. Citizen participation in neighborhood organizations in poor communities and its 
relationship to neighborhood and organizational collective effi  cacy. J Sociol Soc Welfare. 2006;33:179.
66. Wandersman A, Florin P. Citizen participation and community organizations. In: Rappaport J, Seidman 
E, eds. Handbook of Community Psychology. Boston, MA: Springer; 2000:247–272.
67. Alaimo K, Reischl TM, Allen JO. Community gardening, neighborhood meetings, and social capital. 
J Community Psychol. 2010;38:497–514. doi:10.1002/jcop.20378
68. Teig E, Amulya J, Bardwell L, et al. Collective effi  cacy in Denver, Colorado: strengthening 
neighborhoods and health through community gardens. Health Place. 2009;15:1115–1122. doi:10.1016/
j.healthplace.2009.06.003
69. Powers A. Live Well Greenville: Making the Healthy Choice the Easy Choice. 2014. http://scholarexchange.
furman.edu/records-ghs/3


===PAGE 250===
 
9. Urban Health and Urbanization: Acting on Social Determinants in Urban Settings 
225
70. U.S. Census Bureau. QuickFacts. Greenville County, South Carolina. 2018. https://census.gov/quickfacts/
fact/table/greenvillecountysouthcarolina/RHI725216
71. Mazdra B, Behlmann, T, Brennan LK. LiveWell Greenville Case Report. St. Louis, MO: Transtria; 2014. 
http://www.transtria.com/hkhc
72. Kemper KA, Pate SP, Powers AR, Fair M. Promoting healthy environments in aft erschool settings: the 
LiveWell Greenville aft erschool initiative. Prev Chronic Dis. 2018;15:1–10. doi:10.5888/pcd15.180164
73. LiveWell Greenville. Making the Healthy Choice the Easy Choice. 2019. https://livewellgreenville.org


===PAGE 252===
10
GLOBAL HEALTH: IMPORTANCE 
OF INTERPROFESSIONAL 
APPROACH
LAUREN R. SASTRE, JIGNA M. DHAROD, AND DANIELLE L. NUNNERY
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe global nutrition security (NS) and associated, complex socioenvironmental 
 factors.
2. Identify major organizations working on nutrition issues worldwide.
3. Identify key nutrition and health issues that the public health practitioner should consider 
when working with a global population.
4. Understand the importance of food insecurity in predicting health and productivity of the 
population.
5. Examine the role of water in sustaining food security and ensuring optimal nutritional 
status at the global level.
6. Explain various mechanisms for migration and the unique nutrition and health risks that 
individuals face pre-, peri-, and postmigration.
7. Defi ne cultural competence and describe ways in which public health practitioners 
can eff ectively meet the social, cultural, and linguistic needs of the communities they 
serve.
INTRODUCTION
Th is chapter outlines key health and nutrition considerations for public health nutrition (PHN) 
practitioners when they work with individuals in the global setting, be it abroad or in the United 
States. Specifi c topics include food and water security, immigration status and access to services, 
the role of resettlement, and best practices for working with diverse populations, including evi-
dence-based resources and cultural competency.


===PAGE 253===
228 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
GLOBAL NUTRITION AND NUTRITION SECURITY
Major Global Nutrition Issues and Defi ning NS
Th e concept of NS is one lens through which we can examine nutrition risks, nutrition concerns, 
and the status of nutrition in individuals and communities globally. It is defi ned in a position 
paper on NS by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics:
Nutrition security requires that all people have access to a variety of nutritious foods and 
potable drinking water; knowledge, resources, and skills for healthy living; prevention, 
treatment, and care for diseases aff ecting nutrition status; and safety-net systems during 
crisis situations, such as natural disasters or deleterious social and political systems.1
NS is complex and includes interrelated contextual (e.g., social–environmental) and behav-
ioral determinants of nutritional status and security. Food insecurity is a more familiar nutrition 
measure and it is included within the concept of NS, for without food security one cannot have 
NS. However, NS expands to include health services, environmental conditions, and health and 
nutritional status. NS moves beyond food to encompass optimal nutritional status and the condi-
tions necessary to support it. A conceptual framework and defi nitions were developed by Gross et 
al. (see Figure 6 on page 7 of “Th e Four Dimensions of Food and Nutrition Security: Defi nitions 
and Concepts,” www.fao.org/elearning/course/fa/en/pdf/p-01_rg_concept.pdf).2
Nutrition insecurity (NIS) includes both defi ciencies and excesses, which are demonstrated 
by inadequate nutrient intake, underweight, and overweight status.1 NIS is a global problem; 
however, because of the complex factors that infl uence NIS, it is not easy to address because of 
such a wide range of interrelated determinants. Th ese determinants include food insecurity; pov-
erty; poor nutritional intake and status (e.g., micronutrient defi ciencies, macronutrient excesses); 
water, hygiene, and sanitation; agricultural systems that do not ensure diverse nutrients or sus-
tainability; infectious diseases, which increase needs and impact absorption, as well as noncom-
municable diseases (NCDs); lack of gender equality (inequality for use of household resources 
as well as educational opportunities, most commonly manifested as a risk for women) and educa-
tion (lack of fi nancial resources to attend school or lack of school access), limited investment and 
capacity for economic stability; and an overall aging global population.1 Within poor nutrition 
intake and micronutrient defi ciencies, there are fi ve common global nutrient defi ciencies, which 
are the primary focus of PHN and clinicians globally. Th ey include iron, folate, vitamin A, zinc, 
and iodine.1
The Socioeconomic Context
In order to address micronutrient defi ciencies and NIS, it is critical to understand the complex 
socioeconomic factors that aff ect low- and lower-income countries, arguably the countries most 
burdened by NIS.1 Low-income countries (previously labeled as “developing countries”) are now 
classifi ed by the World Bank into four economic classifi cations based on gross national income 
(GNI): low-, lower middle, upper middle, and high-income countries.3 Recent discussions have 
focused on the limitations of using groupings based on income such as “developing” country as 
there is no consensus on the meaning of this defi nition and oft en it only refl ects national wealth 
and industry. More appropriate and inclusive classifi cation defi nitions have been developed in 
order to aid in setting nutrition and health priorities and goals.3 A newer more inclusive and com-
prehensive category has been developed by the United Nations (UN) and is called the Human 
Development Index (HDI), which goes beyond income classifi cations to include more factors of 


===PAGE 254===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
229
capacity: a life expectancy index (life expectancy at birth), education index (expected and mean 
years of schooling), and a GNI index (GNI per capita);4 see Figure 10.1. Th e HDI overlaps with 
economic capacity and the social determinants of health (SDOH), making it a more useful tool 
for nutrition public health workers and researchers to classify countries when prioritizing pro-
gramming, funding, and resources.
Major Global Organizations Addressing NIS
Within the UN, four organizations were formed to address NIS. Most were established aft er World 
War II; they are World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO), and the World Food Programme (WFP). 
Table 10.1 provides an overview of each of these on the global scale.5–11
Each of these organizations plays a crucial role in addressing short-term and long-term 
nutrition risks and needs for vulnerable communities worldwide. In Busoro, Rwanda, UNICEF 
provided children with a meal during a community nutrition event (www.unicef.org/nutrition/
index_action.html). Th e children were then weighed and measured as part of growth and nutri-
tion monitoring.
Th e WFP provides “food baskets” for crisis situations and/or refugee camps. Basic WFP rations 
include a grain staple (e.g., fl our, rice), legumes (lentils, chickpeas, pulses, or beans), vegetable oil 
fortifi ed with vitamins A and D, sugar, and iodized salt. Food rations per individual include 2,100 
kcal, 10% to 12% from protein and 17% from fat, and micronutrients vitamin A, iron, iodine, and 
zinc. Although these rations are intended to reduce common nutritional defi ciencies and provide 
basic nutrition support, they may be the staple diet for populations that have experienced confl ict 
and/or for refugees for longer term crises. For example, several confl icts and refugee crises in the 
regions have been occurring for decades. Long-term lack of produce or fresh produce further puts 
these individuals and groups at risk for long-term adverse health outcomes.
Th e previously described organizations are large-scale players striving to address global nutri-
tion risks with a primary focus on malnutrition/undernutrition. Organizations such as UNICEF 
and WHO provide a wide coverage of surveillance and programming, but there are smaller non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) working toward addressing nutrition risks at the commu-
nity level. Of these, successful approaches include programmatic elements that build capacity 
by addressing primary risk factors associated with poor nutrition, including but not limited to 
FIGURE 10.1 Human Development Index developed by the United Nations includes three 
key indicators that refl ect the health and economic and status of a country: life expectancy at 
birth, education, and GNI per capita.
GNI, gross national income.
Source: From Human Development Index. United Nations Development Programme: Human Development Reports. 
2019. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi
DIMENSIONS
Long and healthy life
Knowledge
A decent standard of living
INDICATORS
DIMENSION
INDEX
Life expectancy at birth
Expected years
of schooling
Mean years
of schooling
Education index
GNI per capita (PPP $)
Human Development
Index (HDI)
Life expectancy index
GNI index
Human Development Index (HDI)


===PAGE 255===
230 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
TABLE 10.1 MAJOR GLOBAL ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE NUTRITION AND HEALTH SERVICES
ORGANIZATION 
FOUNDED (YEAR) 
OVERVIEW/MISSION
LOCATIONS
World Health Organization 
(WHO)5 
1948 
The primary global organization addressing nutrition is WHO. WHO’s mission includes 
a focus on health systems, health through the life span, communicable and noncom-
municable diseases, emergency preparedness, surveillance, response, and corporate 
services around the globe. WHO also coordinates efforts with governments and NGO 
partners to coordinate national health priorities and policies to meet global health 
goals.
150 countries 
United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF)6
1946 
Priority areas include child protection and inclusion, child survival (nutrition), education, 
emergency response, gender inequality, as well as research. UNICEF nutrition-specifi c 
initiatives focus on the following: baby-friendly hospital initiatives, breastfeeding/
complementary foods, micronutrients, SAM, HIV, and nutrition as well as integration of 
nutrition into other areas, including health, water, and sanitation. 
90 countries 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the UN 
(FAO)7,8
The FAO specifi cally focuses on addressing and eradicating hunger. The FAO’s primary 
focus is on fi ve key areas: (a) elimination of hunger, food insecurity, and malnutri-
tion; (b) increase sustainability and productivity of agriculture, forestry, and fi sheries; 
(c) reduce rural poverty; (d) enable inclusive and effi cient agricultural/food systems; and 
(e) increase the resilience of livelihoods (work/careers) to threats and crises. The FAO’s 
priorities fi t well within the 2015–2030 SDGs set by the UN, which include multiple 
areas associated with food insecurity and environmental goals to increase health equity. 
(See Continue Your Learning Resources for link to interactive SDGs.) 
130 countries 
(continued)


===PAGE 256===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
231
TABLE 10.1 MAJOR GLOBAL ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE NUTRITION AND HEALTH SERVICES (continued)
ORGANIZATION 
FOUNDED (YEAR) 
OVERVIEW/MISSION
LOCATIONS
World Food Programme 
(WFP)9
1961
The WFP’s primary function is as a crisis and relief organization that directly provides 
emergency food, although they do also work on longer term initiatives within com-
munities to improve nutrition. One in nine individuals still do not have enough to eat 
and while emergency food assistance is still vital to addressing nutrition insecurity in 
the short term, other areas of capacity and community building are needed to break 
cycles of hunger and poverty that create long-term food insecurity. The WFP is not 
only committed to addressing hunger but also nutrition, and they offer many resources 
to help assess communities to identify barriers to accessing and consuming healthy 
and nutritious foods such as the Fill the Nutrient Gap tool. The WFP also works along 
with other organizations and initiatives such as SUN. SUN was established in 2010 and 
is a collaborative effort including individuals, the UN, businesses, and researchers to 
address nutrition, especially malnutrition, and works toward achieving all of the SDGs. 
80+ countries
International Rescue 
Committee (IRC)10
1933 
The IRC works primarily within humanitarian crises and responds during confl ict 
and disasters cities with a focus on the provision of clean water, shelter, healthcare, 
education, and empowerment. The IRC in particular has a focus on addressing child 
malnutrition in particularly remote areas. The IRC conducts research to ensure the use 
of evidence-based practices in addressing malnutrition and infant and child feeding 
initiatives. They also train lay health workers in their own communities, also known as 
the Community Health Worker Model, to address nutrition, particularly SAM.11 
40+ countries and 
26 U.S. cities 
NGO, nongovernmental organization; SAM, severe acute malnutrition; SDGs, Sustainable Development Goals; SUN, Scaling up for Nutrition; UN, United Nations.


===PAGE 257===
232 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
poverty, gender and education inequalities, limited healthcare access, and low nutrition and 
health literacy (knowledge) as well as sustainability.
One approach that has demonstrated success in regions throughout the world is goat herding 
programs whereby farmers are given goats or microloans to purchase a herd. Many of the world’s 
most at-risk populations are in rural, poor areas working on small-scale farms. Th ese “goat proj-
ects” provide a source of protein, nutrient-rich milk, and manure for compositing and enriching 
soil. Additionally, goat’s milk may be used as soap, which supports hygiene or additional oppor-
tunities for income and goats are relatively small, inexpensive, easy animals to raise and provide 
additional income when they or their products are sold. Research has shown that agriculture proj-
ects, including animal husbandry, are most eff ective when they include educational and empow-
erment opportunities that address gender inequality, nutrition and health literacy, and budgeting/
fi nancial literacy.12 Furthermore, research evaluating agricultural and animal husbandry projects 
on NIS is limited but warranted to drive eff orts by NGOs and other organizations to ensure the 
best use of limited resources to maximize the capacity within communities. Necessary business 
and related math skills (e.g., pricing, budgeting) should also be addressed.
GLOBAL NUTRITION RISKS TO HEALTH STATUS 
ACROSS THE LIFE SPAN
In this section, we expand on global nutrition security and insecurity through discussion of spe-
cifi c risks throughout the life span as well as the socioenvironmental contextual factors that infl u-
ence these globally.
The Dual Burden of Malnutrition
Malnutrition represents an imbalance in an individual’s intake of nutrients and covers the two 
major ends of the spectrum of nutritional status, including both undernutrition and overnu-
trition. As the name suggests, undernutrition refers to a defi ciency of macronutrients and/or 
micronutrients caused by starvation and characterized by low body weight, wasting, and stunt-
ing. Globally, anemia related to iron defi ciency is one of the most common issues of undernutri-
tion (Figure 10.2). Iron, vitamin A, iodine, and zinc are the most prevalent vitamin and mineral 
defi ciencies in the world. When one considers which foods are rich in these nutrients and the 
tendency toward a grain-heavy (processed grain) diet, it is not surprising that these are the most 
common defi ciencies globally.
In contrast, overnutrition represents the condition of excess in which an individual is chron-
ically exceeding the daily requirements for macronutrients (excess calories), leading oft en to 
obesity but possibly getting limited amounts of critical quality micronutrients. In mapping the 
prevalence of these two nutrition imbalances, in general, overnutrition is mainly a problem 
of high-income countries like the United States, China, and Canada, while undernutrition is 
mainly seen in middle- and low-income countries. For instance, according to the Global Obesity 
Observatory, approximately 38% of adult men in the United States are obese, while in Kenya (a 
lower middle income country), the obesity rate among adult men is about 4%.13 Similarly, under-
nutrition among children (for example, stunting, wasting, and being underweight) is a major 
problem in middle- to low-income countries. However, owing to the increase in urbanization, 
economic growth, and technological advancement, the issue of malnutrition has become more 
complex and multinomial in recent years. Around 45% of deaths among young children are 
linked to undernutrition in low- and middle-income countries. At the same time, in these same 


===PAGE 258===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
233
countries, rates of childhood overweight and obesity are rising.14 Th is coexistence of under- and 
overnutrition, which is seen at the individual, household, or population level, is referred as “the 
double burden of malnutrition.” According to Perez Escamilla, this double burden of malnutri-
tion is an eff ect of economic disparities and food insecurity.15 Especially, it is noted that the double 
burden of malnutrition is common among food-insecure households in which access to safe and 
nutritious food is a problem.
Food Insecurity
At the 1996 UN World Food Summit, the importance of food security was highlighted, and 
its defi nition was established to include three key components: food availability, food access, 
and food utilization and stability. Food security is also a critical component of NS—one cannot 
achieve nutrition security without food security. Food security was defi ned as occurring “When 
all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access to suffi  cient, safe and nutritious 
food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.”16 In con-
trast, food insecurity occurs when people do not have consistent access to a suffi  cient amount of 
safe and nutritious food due to issues in food availability, access, and/or its utilization. According 
to the FAO report on the global state of food insecurity, in 2017, approximately 770 million peo-
ple, or 10% of the world’s population, were experiencing hunger.17 By continents, the rate of hun-
ger ranges from about 1.4% in Northern America and Europe to 30% in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Hunger represents the most severe level of food insecurity, in which individuals cut portion sizes 
or skip meals due to lack of food. In food insecurity, coping strategies oft en include reliance on 
FIGURE 10.2 Prevalence of anemia in women of reproductive age (15–29 years; 2016), 
measured as the percentage of women with a hemoglobin level less than 110 grams per liter 
at sea level.
Source: Adapted from Ritchie H, Roser M. Micronutrient Deficiency. 2019. https://ourworldindata.org/micronutrient
-deficiency
No data 0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Our World
in Data


===PAGE 259===
234 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
calorie-dense but nutrient-poor staple foods, which has been a signifi cant cause of the double 
burden of malnutrition resulting in high rates of overweight and obesity among both children and 
adults.18,19 Th is phenomenon has now become well documented as the food insecurity–obesity 
paradox.20,21 In a nutritional assessment of 4,299 pairs of 15- to 49-year-old mothers and their 
children in Brazil, it was found that overweight mothers were signifi cantly likely to have a stunted 
child and the odds of this combination were signifi cantly higher among food-insecure house-
holds.22 In a similar cross-sectional survey in Indonesia, 24% of households in the study had a 
combination of a within-household stunted child and an overweight/obese mother. In examining 
the predictors, again it was found that the odds of this combination were about two times higher 
among food-insecure households.23
EFFECTS OF FOOD INSECURITY DURING THE FIRST 1,000 DAYS 
OF LIFE
In order to understand this coexistence of over- and undernutrition within families, it is criti-
cal to examine food insecurity in the context of the life-course approach or perspective.24 Th e 
life-course perspective recognizes that experiences of food shortage or food insecurity during 
childhood aff ect how an individual manages and views food in adulthood. Additionally, and per-
haps most critically, the life-course approach recognizes that food insecurity aff ects nutritional 
status and health right from the beginning of life. Th e fi rst 1,000 days of life, representing the 
period between conception and one’s second birthday, is a critical period of opportunity to estab-
lish foundations for optimal health, growth, and neurodevelopment for the lifetime. Hence, food 
insecurity or limited access to nutritious foods (including critical vitamins and minerals) during 
this period can have serious detrimental eff ects on potential growth and development, which can 
ultimately aff ect long-term health in childhood and beyond into adulthood.
Research studies have shown that food insecurity is associated with obesity among women in 
the United States and other countries.25 Additionally, it is noted that food insecurity is signifi cantly 
associated with stress and depression, which in turn, also infl uence food choice and dietary pat-
tern.26,27 Specifi cally, stress hormones and neuropeptides alter metabolism to favor and increase 
cravings for highly palatable foods. Chronic stress, common among food-insecure women, acti-
vates the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, which is associated with a high preference for 
high-sugar, high-fat foods to dampen the stress response.28 Increased release of stress-related 
hormones in chronic stress is also associated with shift ing metabolism favoring deposition of 
visceral (fat around the organs) or central abdominal fat. Studies have shown that higher levels of 
perceived stress are associated with uncontrolled eating and emotional eating among low-income 
women.29 Considering the stress of poverty, limited educational and economic opportunities, 
and gender inequality, one can easily see the excessive burden on the world’s most vulnerable 
populations.
Further, studies in the United States show that, low-income, minority women, who are at a 
higher risk of experiencing food insecurity, tend to gain excess weight during pregnancy and are 
more likely to retain excess weight post partum.30–32 As a result, in the subsequent pregnancy, 
women are entering pregnancy with excess weight and are likely to repeat the cycle of excess 
gestational weight gain and postpartum weight retention. Research examining the life-course 
perspective indicates that prepregnancy overweight or obesity and excess weight gain during 
pregnancy are both signifi cant predictors of high body fat and weight among infants and chil-
dren later in their lives. Further, food insecurity can compound its eff ect on the next generation 


===PAGE 260===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
235
because it is associated with restricted feeding and high-fat and high-sugar complementary feed-
ing. Qualitative research indicates that food-insecure mothers are oft en stressed and worried that 
they might not have the “capacity” to produce enough milk for their babies.33
Food insecurity not only poses a risk of overweight and obesity during the fi rst 1,000 days of 
life, but it is also likely to aff ect growth and development through micronutrient defi ciencies and 
lack of variety in the diet. Brain development occurs at the most rapid rate in the last trimester 
of pregnancy and the fi rst two years of life. Th e fi rst 1,000 days are characterized by rapid pro-
liferation of neural cells, myelination, and development of connectivity in the brain, and hence, 
represent a window of greatest vulnerability to any nutrient defi ciency. For optimal development, 
the brain requires a range of micronutrients including protein and polyunsaturated fatty acids. 
Additionally, minerals such as iron, zinc, copper, and iodine are particularly important. Iron defi -
ciency is the most common nutrient defi ciency in the world, and it is oft en associated with lack 
of variety in the diet due to food insecurity.34 Worldwide, approximately 47% (293 million) of all 
young children and 42% (56 million) of all pregnant women are anemic, and in about half of them 
iron defi ciency is the cause. A recent report from UNICEF indicates that prevention of iron defi -
ciency during the fi rst 1,000 days of life is very important to prevent lower mental development 
and poor productivity in adulthood.35 Addressing food insecurity and promoting optimal nutri-
tion during this critical phase of the fi rst 1,000 days of life is needed to break the cycle of poverty 
and promote health equity around the world.
Addressing Food Insecurity: Moving Forward
Th ree main pillars of our food system must be strengthened in order to address global food inse-
curity: food availability, food access, and food utilization. Food availability is generally measured 
at the country level referring to agricultural input and output, national trade practices, and import 
and export policies that allow the country to have enough food to feed and nourish its population. 
Th is is a critical piece in predicting food security of the country or vulnerability to food insecurity 
at the national level. In measuring food availability, the estimate of daily dietary energy supply per 
capita is used, which is measured by adding net food production and imports and deducting food 
exports and food lost, stored, or used for animal feed or industry. Recently, the food availability 
or daily dietary supply per capita has worsened in parts of sub-Saharan African, Southeast Asia, 
and Western Asia. Th is deterioration has been attributed mainly to regional confl icts and confl icts 
combined with natural disasters of droughts or fl oods.17 For instance, civil confl icts, which began 
in 2012 in the Central African Republic, have led to a 57% reduction in cultivated crop areas and 
a decrease in food production by 54%. In addition to crop reduction, confl icts have also led to 
livestock-related loss, with 46% for cattle and 57% for small ruminants (goats, sheep), forcing one 
fourth of rural farmers to shift  to other sources for livelihoods.17
In 2010, the UN recognized access to clean water as a basic human right, yet a majority of 
the world’s population in low-income countries experience moderate to severe water scarcity. 
Approximately, 1.8 billion people lack access to safe drinking water, and this situation is predicted 
to get worse by the year 2025.36 It is important to realize that clean water is an essential nutri-
ent and meeting its daily requirement is critical to ensure optimal absorption and utilization of 
nutrients at the physiological level. Additionally, clean water is needed to ensure food safety and 
hygiene and is critical in prevention of infectious diseases that lead to diarrhea. In low-income 
countries, 50% of all undernutrition cases in children are related to repeated diarrhea and intesti-
nal parasite related infections.37 As indicated in Figure 10.3, research indicates that water security 
or consistent access to a safe and suffi  cient of amount of clean water is a critical component in 


===PAGE 261===
236 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
preventing diarrhea and poor food utilization—a leading cause of malnutrition among children 
in low-income countries (Figure 10.3).38
Th e UN Water Report established the defi nition of water security:
the capacity of a population to safeguard sustainable access to adequate quantities of and 
acceptable quality water for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-economic 
development, for ensuring protection against water-borne pollution and water-related 
disasters, and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of peace and political stability.39
Further, to promote water security, one of the goals of 2015–2030 Sustainable Development 
Goals is to “Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all.”17,40 
Additionally, key water access related indicators were established to monitor and evaluate the 
success in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).40 According to the UN, water 
access is considered poor when (a) per capita water use is less than 50 liters per day, (b) total water 
collection time is more than 30 minutes, (c) water source is not within 1,000 meters of home, and 
(d) water cost is more than 3% of the household income. Establishment of these standards has 
been very critical in monitoring and planning specifi c water-related issues. However, it is very 
much interrelated to food security and the progress we make in improving maternal and child 
nutrition in developing or low-income countries.
An understanding of global nutrition issues and interrelated risk factors (e.g., food security, 
water security, SDOH) and their eff ect particularly on maternal and child nutrition (e.g., fi rst 
FIGURE 10.3 Interrelationship among water, diarrhea, and food utilization (third pillar of 
food security). Feces are the main vehicle of transmission for diarrhea, causing bacterial 
and parasitic infections. Transmission and contamination of food occur when feces gets into 
“fl uids” (water supplies), when there is poor handwashing or inability to wash after defecation 
(“fi ngers”), when feces-contaminated water covers food crops (“fi elds”), and when “fl ies” 
alight on bacteria-laden feces and then land on foods to be consumed.
Source: From Nounkeu DC. Assessment of the Relationship Between Water Insecurity, Hygiene Practices, and the 
Incidence of Diarrhea Among Children from Rural Households of the Menoua Division - West Cameroon. 2017. http://
libres.uncg.edu/ir/uncg/listing.aspx?styp=ti&id=22592
Food
Potential
victim of
diarrheal
related
malnutrition 
Feces
Hygiene practices, like
handwashing with soap, intervene
at critical stages of cross-
contamination
Proper sanitation
prevents fecal–oral
contamination route  
Clean and safe water free of
physical, chemical, and bacterial
contamination maintains a healthy
gut lining   
Water security, or consistent access to safe and sufficient amount of water for an active and
healthy lifestyle, improves sanitation, increases the availability of safe drinking water, and
improves hygiene practices 
Fluids
Fingers
Flies
Fields


===PAGE 262===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
237
1,000 days) is not only critical for the PHN practitioner working globally, but also for the PHN 
practitioner working domestically with foreign-born individuals and communities. Th us far, we 
have provided an overview of global nutritional issues and now we transition to include an intro-
duction to U.S. migration as well as related postarrival nutritional risk factors. When working 
domestically, the PHN practitioner must not only be familiar with prearrival or premigration 
global nutrition risks but also postarrival or postmigration risks. We begin the next section with 
an overview of migration (e.g., Who comes? Why and to where? What are the diff erent immi-
gration categories and how do they impact nutrition resources in the United States?) and then 
expand to focus on specifi c risks and key considerations when working with diverse, foreign-born 
populations in the United States.
U.S. MIGRATION: GARNERING AN UNDERSTANDING 
OF THE EXPERIENCES, CONTEXT, ACCULTURATION PROCESS, 
AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH MIGRATION
Introduction to U.S. Migration–Immigration and Refugee Resettlement
By 2044 it is expected that, for the fi rst time, the United States will switch to a “minority-majority” 
nation.41 By 2060, the foreign-born population of the United States is expected to increase by 85%, 
which will lead to dramatic demographic shift s in the United States.41 Th e estimated percentage of 
individuals with Hispanic or Latino origin is expected to increase by 114.8% from 2014 to 2060, 
and they are the third fastest growing population, with the “two or more races” identifi cation 
category projected to be the fastest and the Asian population to be the second fastest growing.41 
In order to address nutrition and related health needs of an increasingly diverse U.S. popula-
tion, PHN practitioners should have a foundational knowledge of the categories and causes for 
migration to the United States as well as the socioenvironmental premigration context. In the 
next section, we provide an overview of the following: (a) defi nition of terms related to migra-
tion, (b) primary geographic regions globally where the United States receives high numbers of 
foreign-born individuals, and (c) an overview of the acculturation process and risks associated as 
demonstrated by the model proposed by Schwartz and colleagues.
Th e U.S. immigration policy is guided by the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA, 1952) 
and current reasons for migration to the United States primarily include family reunifi cation, U.S. 
labor market contribution, origin-country diversity, and humanitarian assistance.42 Th e INA sets 
a ceiling on permanent immigration admissions at 675,000 total individuals per year. However, 
this number does not represent refugee resettlement numbers, which are determined by the U.S. 
president and Congress annually.42 Limits are also set by the INA, which include a 7% cap for 
any category of entrance to the United States per nationality called a “per-country limit” or “cap.” 
Table 10.2 summarizes U.S. INA defi ned migration categories.
Reasons for Migration
Individuals migrate for a variety of reasons, and it is valuable to the PHN practitioner to under-
stand the diff erences and categories for new arrivals to the United States as each has its own 
nutrition-related prearrival risks and unique SDOH. For example, refugees are a unique category. 
Refugees are identifi ed as fl eeing because of persecution or fear of persecution for “race, reli-
gion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.” Th ese individuals 
are identifi ed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and currently 


===PAGE 263===
238 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
57% of all refugees come from fi ve countries: Syria, Afghanistan, South Sudan, Myanmar, and 
Somalia.43 Some individuals fl ee and enter another country before they can be recognized as ref-
ugees and they are called asylum seekers or asylees and they may petition their host country for 
refugee status.44 Individuals who fl ee persecution or violence but who do not leave their home 
country are known as internally displaced people (IDPs). IDPs are not protected by interna-
tional law or eligible to receive aid as refugees.44 For more information about refugee resettlement 
in the United States, visit www.unrefugees.org/refugee-facts/usa.
Many U.S. foreign-born individuals may have lived decades in a refugee camp setting with 
limited access to healthcare and education as well as water and food insecurity, all of which aft er 
fl eeing persecution and violence. Some refugee camps do not even have adequate lighting.68 
Th is prearrival socioenvironmental context and related health and nutrition risks are import-
ant to keep in mind when working with groups aft er their arrival to the United States (see 
Box 10.1).
Although the United States receives very diverse groups annually, there are some countries 
from which the United States has received larger numbers of immigrants and/or refugees and 
asylees. However, these trends shift  over time and would have looked very diff erent 10 or 20 years 
ago. From 2015 to 2017, the bulk of immigrants entering and obtaining permanent legal status 
in the United States were from Mexico, China, India, Philippines, and Cuba (15.1%, 7.1%, 6.1%, 
5.4%, and 5.2%, respectively).45
TABLE 10.2 SUMMARY OF U.S. INA MIGRATION CATEGORY DEFINITIONS
TERM 
DEFINITIONS AS PER THE U.S. PRIMER ON U.S. IMMIGRATION 
POLICY
Aliens*
“people who are not U.S. citizens, including those legally and not legally 
present” 
Unauthorized aliens
“foreign nationals who reside unlawfully in the United States and who either 
entered the United States illegally (‘without inspection’) or entered lawfully 
and temporarily (‘with inspection’) but subsequently violated the terms of their 
admission, typically by ‘overstaying’ their visa duration”
Immigrants†
“foreign nationals lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent 
residence”
Nonimmigrants
“foreign nationals temporarily and lawfully admitted to the United States for 
a specifi c purpose and period of time, including tourists, diplomats, students, 
temporary workers, and exchange visitors, among others” 
Noncitizens
“persons who have not naturalized and may include immigrants as well as 
nonimmigrants”
Naturalized citizens
“LPRs who become U.S. citizens through a process known as naturalization, 
generally after residing in the United States continuously for at least fi ve years”
Refugees and 
asylees‡
“persons fl eeing their countries because of persecution, or a well-founded fear 
of persecution, on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a partic-
ular social group, or political opinion”
*The terms “alien,” “foreign national,” and “noncitizen” are synonymous.
†The terms “immigrant,” “lawful permanent resident” (LPR), and “green-card holder” are synonymous.
‡Refugees and asylees are not classifi ed as immigrants under the INA, but once admitted, they may adjust their status to 
LPR.
INA Immigration and Nationality Act.
Source: Data from Kandel WA. A Primer on U.S. Immigration Policy. 2018. https://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/
key_workplace/2119


===PAGE 264===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
239
BOX 10.1
PRACTITIONER NOTES: IMMIGRATION STATUS DETERMINES ACCESS 
TO SOCIAL SERVICES
Different classiﬁ cations for foreign-born individuals (e.g., refugee vs. immigrant vs. unauthorized aliens) 
result in different access to health and social services:
 
■
Refugees, for example, enter the United States through a formal resettlement program, are 
provided a Social Security number and have access to healthcare (Medicaid), SNAP assistance, 
and WIC as well as other resources (e.g., employment assistance, ESL classes) for a few months 
(up to 1 year) after arrival. It is important to highlight that although refugees may receive initial 
government beneﬁ ts, they are also a vulnerable group with many having experienced recent 
active war and trauma in combination with the stress of being new in a foreign country.
 
■
Immigrants vary based usually on their legal status. Unauthorized aliens or “undocumented” 
individuals will not be able to receive beneﬁ ts like SNAP or Medicaid, whereas documented 
immigrants are able to connect with and receive social service beneﬁ ts. (Important note: Undoc-
umented families may be eligible for WIC.) Undocumented immigrants are at great risk for food 
insecurity, poor healthcare access, and adverse health outcomes.
ESL, English as a second language; SNAP, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; WIC, Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
Th e states receiving the highest numbers for persons obtaining permanent residence from 
2015 to 2017 were California, New York, and Florida (19.9%, 12.4%, and 11.3%, respectively).45 
In contrast to general immigration, refugees have arrived over the past decade primarily from 
Southeast Asia (Burma, Bhutan), the Middle East (Iraq), and Africa (Somalia, Democratic 
Republic of Congo).46 Texas, California, and New York were the top three states in the United 
States receiving immigrants and refugees (10.7%, 8.2%, 5.8%, respectively).46
Acculturation
During and aft er the complex migration process, foreign-born individuals experience some degree 
of acculturation. Acculturation is a process by which individuals adopt behaviors and beliefs of the 
host culture. Th is process has also been associated with the immigrant paradox in which an indi-
vidual’s health declines over time particularly when he or she migrates to Eurocentric Westernized 
countries.47 Typically, this decline in health is related to lack of activity and an increase in con-
sumption of a more Westernized diet (fast foods, processed and packaged foods) results in the 
development and/or exacerbation of chronic disease like diabetes, hypertension, and heart disease.
Acculturation has traditionally been defi ned as a linear progression where the individual 
becomes more and more like his or her receiving culture in terms of language, food practices, and 
behaviors. Th eoretically, this linear progression would mean that they would be more successful 
economically (stable job, access to education) and socially (acquire language, customs) as they 
assimilate or become more like the host country. However, Schwartz and colleagues proposed that 
this linear progression is inaccurate and proposed the “Multidimensionality of Acculturation” 
model, which suggests that individuals retain their own culture in certain areas and adopt the host 
culture in others, sometimes moving back and forth along the continuum for diff erent practices, 


===PAGE 265===
240 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
values, and identifi cations (self). Schwartz et al. propose that they are more resilient and success-
ful because of this variable adoption of practices. Th eir model explores the complexity of the pro-
cess and associated factors, and they identifi ed two primary areas of variance based on (a) culture 
and ethnicity and (b) socioenvironmental context of reception.47
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: BEST PRACTICES FOR PHN 
PROFESSIONALS WORKING WITH DIVERSE AUDIENCES
Understand the Context
Individuals live in complex social, political, economic, and cultural (religion, ethnicity/race) con-
texts that shape their physical and mental health. As a PHN professional, it is critical to consider 
all of the elements that intersect in this context or “bigger picture” when you work with clients 
either locally or abroad. Within this context, there are several key issues for consideration: edu-
cation/literacy, prior job training/skills, mental and physical health, previous food shortage, and 
gender inequality. Th ese factors ultimately impact the individual’s ability to adapt, grow, and suc-
ceed both pre- and postmigration. A model summarizing these factors is presented in Figure 10.4, 
and further description follows.
FIGURE 10.4 Pre- and postmigration factors that impact health and socioeconomic status. 
Refugees and immigrants bring with them previous experiences of limited opportunities 
and unstable living conditions in resettlement. On top of that, they experience issues such 
as language barriers and responsibility of supporting families or friends living in camps or 
other countries. This combination of embedded pre- and postresettlement factors affect the 
individual’s ability to seek employment, health status, ability to access social services and 
programs, and ultimately increase risk for food insecurity.
Source: Adapted from Nunnery DL, Dharod JM. Potential determinants of food security among refugees in the 
U.S.: an examination of pre- and post-resettlement factors. Food Secur. 2017;9(1):163–179. doi:10.1007/
s12571-016-0637-z
Employment
opportunities
Mental and
physical health
status
Access and ability
to enroll in social
service programs
Health behaviors
and access to
health care
Post-Resettlement
factors
Low socioeconomic
status
&
Food insecurity
Transportation
issues
Remittance
home
Poor english
language
proficiency
Malnutrition,
disease, &
trauma
Low literacy
& limited/no
formal
education or
work skills
Conflict or
natural disaster,
living in camps,
gender
inequality
Pre-
Resettlement
factors


===PAGE 266===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
241
Education and Literacy
Public education in grades K–12 is available and compulsory (up to a certain age) in most mid-
dle-income and higher income countries like the United States, Canada, China, and Mexico. 
However, in some countries, education is not always compulsory and is oft en only accessible if 
families can aff ord to pay for private education and/or ensure transportation and safety. Generally, 
these countries may be considered lower income and most have suff ered severe prolonged con-
fl ict or natural disasters that have destroyed government, fi nancial, and community infrastruc-
ture. However, educational attainment and literacy cannot be assumed based on the country of 
origin; much is dependent on resources and location for schooling. In a study examining food 
insecurity among Liberian refugees (n = 33) resettled in the United States, it was observed that 
some women had education as high as bachelor’s and master’s degrees while others could not read 
or write even in their native language.48
Literacy, or the ability to read and write in one’s native language, is critical to navigating a 
majority of positions in the workforce and successfully providing a stable income for one’s family. 
Additionally, literacy can be critical to the development and self-actualization of the individual. 
Even within the United States, a higher income country, approximately 50% of adults read below 
an eighth-grade reading level and roughly 30 million Americans read below very basic prose lit-
eracy (reading for very minor, most basic skills).49 Literacy has been posited as a direct correlate 
to poverty and food insecurity as it greatly impacts earning potential throughout the lifetime of 
the individual.50 Moreover, literacy in one’s native language can be critical to learning reading 
and writing skills in a new language, especially for those who are migrating and need to procure 
work and support services in the receiving country. We may take it for granted, however, even 
basic literacy and profi ciency in English are critical for tasks such as driving and even navigating 
public transportation. Low literacy coupled with the inaccessibility of transportation can directly 
impact employment and access to support services. See Figure 10.5 for estimated literacy rates 
around the world.
Educational attainment and literacy directly aff ect individuals’ prospects for jobs/careers and 
their potential to develop work and trade skills that could ensure a stable income whether they 
are in their home country or have migrated. Literacy is also important for PHN practitioners to 
consider as they would with any individual and community they work with to appropriately target 
and tailor resources and programming.
Prior Job Training and Skills
For immigrants and refugees, one of the fi rst assessments conducted upon arrival examines 
prior employment and any job or trade skills. For individuals who have lived in countries with 
prolonged confl ict or loss of infrastructure, much of the general work and even schooling has 
been halted and people are oft en placed into refugee or IDP camps. Refugee and IDP camps 
are meant to be temporary living shelters, with housing made of plastic or canvas tents, lim-
ited or no electricity, and no formal infrastructure (police/safety, education, sanitation, etc.).51 
Unfortunately, these temporary shelters may become permanent housing for long periods of 
time, up to decades, depending on the severity of confl ict and upheaval in the region. People 
living in camps may have access to education and employment opportunities, but this is not 
guaranteed, and may be sporadically off ered only when funds or resources are available. Th is 
means that upon arrival, many refugees may lack applicable training or job skills that could 
secure employment.


===PAGE 267===
242 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Mental and Physical Health: Trauma Pre- and Postconfl ict/Migration
People tend to migrate to improve their circumstances. Refugees, asylees, and those in various 
immigrant categories (particularly undocumented immigrants) fl ee their home country because 
of fear of persecution or even death in the face of whatever confl ict (civil, political, etc.) or natural 
disaster has gripped their country. Social and political unrest has led to many bitter and violent 
confl icts in parts of the world where families are oft en separated and loss of life is high. In the 
course of migration out of this confl ict, people and their families may have faced long periods of 
travel in harsh weather with little support or resources along the way. Th ey may have relinquished 
all of their fi nancial means toward escape, and these losses, coupled with any physical and men-
tal trauma experienced premigration, conspire to deteriorate mental health. Refugees, asylees, 
and undocumented migrants are at signifi cantly increased risk for posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), severe anxiety, and depression.52,53 In addition to mental health conditions, refugees and 
immigrants may also have physical health conditions (chronic diseases, infectious diseases like 
HIV/AIDS) that become exacerbated perimigration when medical care/medication is inaccessi-
ble or sporadic.
PRIOR FOOD DEPRIVATION, FOOD INSECURITY, AND REMITTANCE
Prior food deprivation experiences are common among individuals who have lived through civil 
confl ict, especially if they have spent time in refugee camps. Periods of food deprivation may 
exacerbate food insecurity postmigration. Studies examining food insecurity among resettled 
refugees in the United States have shown rates ranging from 30% to as high as 85% compared to 
roughly 12% food insecurity nationally.54–56 In a sample of Cambodian refugees, it was found that 
FIGURE 10.5 Global literacy rate, 2015. Estimates correspond to the share of the population 
older than 14 years that is able to read and write. Specifi c defi nitions and measurement 
methodologies vary across countries and time.
Source: From Our World in Data: CIA World Factbook. https://ourworldindata.org/literacy#note-1
No data
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
95%
Our World
in Data


===PAGE 268===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
243
those who experienced prior food deprivation were signifi cantly more likely to resort to unhealthy 
behaviors and coping strategies such as overeating high-fat foods when available. Th ese refugees 
were subsequently more likely to also be overweight and obese, mirroring the phenomenon seen 
in the food insecurity–obesity paradox described earlier.57 For many refugees and migrants, the 
issue of food insecurity is further complicated due to remittance, or the act of sending portions of 
their income back to family still in their home country. Remittance can account for a signifi cant 
amount of an individual’s income. In 2017, the World Bank estimated around $466 billion dollars 
in remittances to low- and middle-income countries.58
Gender Inequality
It is critical to understand the intersection between global health, migration, and gender. Gender 
inequality in and of itself may be the impetus for migration. In patriarchal societies that experi-
ence civil confl ict/disasters and extreme poverty, women, girls, intersex people, and individuals 
of the LGBTQ community oft en receive the least resources and experience high rates of violence 
and discrimination.59 Education of women and girls is not typically prioritized and males receive 
preference in schooling and other educational resources. Gender-based violence can lead to dete-
rioration of mental health that further compromises the success and well-being of individuals as 
they resettle in new countries. Women, especially those who act as caregivers and meal preparers 
of the family, experience higher rates of food insecurity and anxiety around food acquisition both 
pre- and postmigration.60–62
Evidence-Based Practice for Education, Services, and Resources
Validated Resources
In order to gain valuable insight on the community or group of individuals you are working with, 
the fi rst step is to research and critically evaluate existing evidence-based practice resources. Th e 
WHO e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA) is a great starting resource to learn 
about specifi c and eff ective nutrition and health interventions for the population of interest. Th ese 
resources are divided by specifi c period in the life course with WHO recommendations, reports, 
and research defi ning the interventions. Th e Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS), 
also created by WHO, is a major repository of data on the nutrition and health profi les of partic-
ular countries and regions. Th e NLiS provides online tools that include downloadable data from 
a wide range of global sources.63 Th e NLiS helps public health professionals and researchers to 
quickly identify nutrition risks and priorities globally.
WHO also provides critical health warnings (infectious disease outbreaks) and information 
about vaccinations and/or sociopolitical issues for professionals who might be traveling to unfa-
miliar parts of the world. For additional resources, see Continue Your Learning Resources.
Educational Materials and Assessments
Many existing educational resources are culturally relevant and linguistically appropriate for the 
needs of diverse audiences. Do not reinvent the wheel, especially if a good wheel already exists. 
Th e U.S. Committee for Refugees has done extensive research and pooled resources to develop 
the Healthy Living Toolkit and additional nutrition resource handouts. Th e toolkit and nutrition 
handouts are designed to educate not only refugees and immigrants, but also the resettlement 
agencies, clinics, and community-based organizations that serve them. Th e toolkit and nutrition 
resources come in over 15 diff erent languages (including English). Th e toolkit covers topics such 


===PAGE 269===
244 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
as navigating medical services and dental care and the nutrition resource covers topics such as 
food safety, breastfeeding, reading nutrition labels, and increasing foods with adequate calcium 
and iron.
Th e Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has created a resource page for 
Refugee Health Guidelines that defi nes all the guidelines for predeparture and postarrival medi-
cal screening and treatment of U.S.-bound refugees. From this main page, you can also fi nd a link 
to U.S.-Mexico Public Health resources including health and education communication tools. See 
Box 10.2 for helpful tips about using interpreters and translators with clients and patients.
Build Bridges: Interprofessional Collaboration and the Community Health Worker 
Model
As PHN professionals, much of our work is interprofessional including collaborations with 
social workers, medical providers, school, and other governmental (state health departments, 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program [SNAP], Special Supplemental Nutrition Program 
for Women, Infants, and Children [WIC], Medicaid/Medicare) and nongovernmental (resettle-
ment agencies, legal counsel) organizations. It is important to reach out and build a resource 
network of individuals who care about and understand the complex health and nutrition needs 
of a diverse audience.
Further, to provide culturally appropriate care and education, the professional must go 
beyond their evidence-based practice resources and strive to assess and meet the community 
where they are. One of the most eff ective, well-documented ways to do this is by working with 
community health workers (CHWs). CHWs are individuals from the community of interest 
who are trained to provide medical and nutritional care or at the very least to act as liaisons 
and educators on these services for their community. Th ey typically share ethnicity/race, lan-
guage, and cultural background with their community and are most eff ective when they are 
viewed as a trusted member of their community. CHWs can act as a gatekeeper and bridge to 
the community. Th e use of the CHW model has been integral in conducting nutrition needs 
BOX 10.2
PRACTITIONER’S INSIGHT: INTERPRETATION AND TRANSLATION
The terms interpretation and translation are often used interchangeably; however, translation is used 
in the context of written materials (direct word for word or phrase for phrase). Interpretation is typically 
done orally in person or over a language line and involves some actual interpretation of the context and 
possibly meaning of what the individual is saying, especially if the concepts being interpreted are not 
similar between the cultures/languages.
It is the practitioner’s duty to attempt to ﬁ nd a professional interpreter or translator when possible. 
Having children or family members interpret/translate is highly problematic because it violates the pri-
vacy of the individual and may put children and family members in situations that they do not understand 
or that cause undue stress. Most agencies, organizations, or health facilities will have access to a lan-
guage line (phone network for interpreter services) if they do not have professional interpreters on 
staff. If there is no other option, you must be sure that your client or patient consents to proceed with 
family interpretation.


===PAGE 270===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
245
assessments and research with refugee and migrant groups who may feel hesitancy and fear 
in working with outsiders.64 Th e CDC off ers a CHW Toolkit and the Rural Health Information 
Hub off ers descriptive educational modules on Training CHWs and sustainability for nutrition 
interventions using this framework.
Develop Your Cultural Competence
Cultural competence is defi ned as the ability of providers and organizations to eff ectively deliver 
healthcare services (education, counseling, treatment) that meet the social, cultural, and linguistic 
needs of their patients/clients and the community they serve. In order to work with diverse popula-
tions, be it locally or globally, it is necessary to take a holistic approach and cultivate four key areas 
of your development as public health professionals: awareness, attitude, knowledge, and skills.65,66 
 
■
Awareness: Build self-awareness by refl ecting on your own cultural identity and poten-
tial biases toward other identities.
 
■
Attitude: Cultivate an attitude of open-mindedness, compassion, and genuine interest 
in learning about those diff erent from yourself. Strive for genuine empathy and never 
make assumptions despite how much you think you know or have researched. People 
will always surprise you.
 
■
Knowledge: Strive to learn more about the diff erent cultural practices, ideas, and con-
cepts that are important to your patients or clientele. Learn about the specifi c cultural, 
political, and economic environments that might have infl uenced their migration.
 
■
Skills: Practice cross-cultural skills and put yourself out there by trying new cultural 
foods/restaurants, visiting new places (even in your own town), and attending diff er-
ent cultural events and celebrations. Speak with and learn directly from individuals of 
diff erent backgrounds. Learn a new language.
It is important to understand that developing your cultural competence can be uncomfortable 
and challenging. However, developing cultural competence is an ongoing (lifelong) growth pro-
cess that we commit to in order to provide the best care for our clients/patients. Cultural humil-
ity is an additional key trait of the culturally competent PHN practitioner, and it is within the 
context of cultural competency. Cultural humility includes a self-awareness of one’s limitations 
regarding the depth of understanding of another culture’s beliefs, attitudes, values, and practices. 
Cultural humility is a cautious, yet open approach to working with individuals and/or groups that 
vary from one’s own culture and practices.67
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we began by introducing the concept of NS, then expanded to discuss specifi c 
nutritional risks throughout the life span, introduced organizations addressing nutritional issues 
globally, and provided an overview of the immigration process and considerations and risks for 
diverse foreign-born individuals and groups peri- and postarrival to the United States. Whether 
working globally or domestically as a PHN practitioner, an understanding of the socioenviron-
mental context and SDOH that groups experience is critical. Moreover, foundational knowl-
edge and understanding of the target community (cultural competence) is necessary to cultivate 
best practices for any area of public health programming. It is impossible to off er appropriate 
or tailored eff orts to a global or foreign-born U.S. community without knowledge of current 
global issues and their complexity. While we off er a foundation for PHN practitioners to expand 


===PAGE 271===
246 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
their knowledge of global nutrition issues, this alone is not adequate. We urge you to utilize the 
resources provided at the end of this chapter to further develop your cultural competence. We 
have provided a wide range of tools and resources to expand your knowledge, understanding, 
and skills for working with populations internationally and/or domestically including a refl ec-
tion activity, toolkits with nutrition and health education resources in many languages, online 
global nutrition databases, additional primary literature articles, case studies, best practices and 
guidelines for public health/healthcare workers, books, and other media. In addition to these, we 
highly recommend volunteering with organizations that serve diverse populations domestically 
or internationally to further develop your skills as a global minded, culturally competent PHN 
practitioner.
KEY CONCEPTS
Community Health Worker (CHW) Model: A model whereby public health and social service 
workers are trained to provide health services and education to the communities they are close to. 
CHWs oft en share ethnicity, language, socioeconomic status, values, and life experiences with the 
community members they serve. CHWs are and should be chosen by the community and aid as 
a bridge to critical health services.
Cultural Competence: Th e ability of providers and organizations to eff ectively deliver healthcare 
services (education, counseling, treatment) that meet the social, cultural, and linguistic needs of 
patients/clients and the community they serve.
Food insecurity–obesity paradox: Th e concept that those who experience food insecurity are 
paradoxically more likely to also be overweight or obese, particularly in middle-income and 
higher income countries. Th is association is best-documented in adult women. Findings are mixed 
among men and children. Th is paradox is oft en attributed to relying on cheap, calorie-dense, but 
nutrient-poor foods when the individual is food-insecure.
Immigrant paradox: Th e concept that individuals immigrating oft en experience health declines 
over time and especially associated with acculturation processes in Eurocentric Westernized 
countries.
Life-course approach (perspective): A framework that examines how individual health trajec-
tories vary and asserts that patterns can be predicted for populations and communities based on 
social, economic, and environmental exposures and experiences. Life is viewed as a continuum 
of exposures, experiences, and interactions that intersect to infl uence the overall health (genetic, 
biological, and behavioral) of individuals and future generations.
CASE STUDY: HEALTH LITERACY AND RESETTLED 
REFUGEES: DR. LAUREN SASTRE ON HER RESEARCH 
WITH BURMESE REFUGEES
It is important not to make any assumptions regarding health literacy. I worked on a project that 
explored hypertension knowledge and related behavioral risk factors (e.g., diet, lack of physical 
activity, excess adiposity) with a local refugee group. I was invited to work with a group of resettled 
adult Burmese refugees, mostly of Chin ethnicity, by a nurse who worked at a local community free 
clinic. She told me the medical staff  had been noticing consistent high blood pressure, and she was 


===PAGE 272===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
247
very concerned. I began the project by providing digital cameras to the group to document their 
food for 2 weeks. While we waited for the pictures, we provided health screenings and had small 
group discussions about the clinical measurements and health concerns the group had.
Prior to working with the group I immersed myself in any literature I could fi nd as well as 
cultural information online (e.g., CDC provides profi les of refugee groups). Burmese refugees 
are a unique group—having fl ed ethnic, political, and religious persecution over 30 years ago 
with many having lived in either rural refugee camps along the Th ai border (rural) or in urban 
settings within Malaysia where they are treated like undocumented immigrants. Being state-
less for 30+ years dramatically infl uenced education and healthcare access. Moreover, pre-U.S. 
socioenvironmental contexts varied drastically between Malaysia and Th ailand. Th is is one of 
the largest refugee groups resettled in the United States in the past 10 years and there are distinct 
ethnic groups within the overall “Burmese” group as well as individual languages, food practices, 
and so on. Although I had prepared myself with background cultural and socioenvironmental 
information, I was not prepared for how limited the group I worked with would be in regard to 
health literacy.
During our small group facilitated discussions (scheduled by the nurse through an interpreter 
they worked with who was part of the Chin Burmese community and held on Saturdays for a 
month), I quickly realized there was no understanding of blood pressure and while they had 
been told several times their blood pressure was high they did not understand what this meant 
or what the risk was. I explained the relationship between blood pressure and the heart and how 
high blood pressure is risky for the heart. I then (using the digital photographs of the food as well 
as info from a grocery store trip we took together to learn more about what they were eating) 
discussed diet and lifestyle changes that could help with blood pressure, focusing on the basics: 
(a) less salt; (b) more fruits and vegetables following the DASH diet, with examples from their 
traditional foods based on the photographs; (c) portion control, hopefully leading to some weight 
loss; and (d) increased physical activity.
At the last Saturday session we held together, several in the group were very emotional—they 
expressed they did not know their high blood pressure could impact their heart and that it was so 
risky for their health. Th ey told me they were so happy they had learned what was going on with 
them and how to change it. I was incredibly humbled.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Taking time to “do your homework” and learn about a group you are not familiar with 
is an important fi rst step to providing culturally competent services and care; however, 
it is possible such preparation could lead to the development of inaccurate assump-
tions or even biases or stereotyping. What information might you focus on obtaining 
during your preparation? How might you avoid pitfalls previously highlighted when 
you develop materials or begin to interact with groups?
2. 
Educational opportunities may be limited or fully interrupted for some groups, espe-
cially refugees if they fl ed active war or were in camps for extended time periods or 
immigrants in low-income countries. Th is may impact general literacy as well as nutri-
tion and health literacy. How might you cautiously assess and address general as well as 
nutrition and health literacy? What creative approaches might you use to modify your 
materials or approach? Describe three example approaches you might take for a group 
or individual with low literacy in which you are teaching general nutrition education 
topics (e.g. food label, portion sizes, MyPlate).


===PAGE 273===
248 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
3. 
During my experience with the Chin Burmese, I attempted to use motivational inter-
viewing techniques (an evidence-based practice with Western-Eurocentric groups), 
which support the individual to drive the focus of the conversation. Th is did not go 
over well with the Chin Burmese. At one point, one of the women actually said to me 
(as I pushed for the group to guide the topics for our sessions), “I don’t know. You are 
the expert . . . you tell us!”, which brought a round of laughter from the group.
 
Groups might vary not only in their food habits, health beliefs, perceptions of gender 
roles, and religion . . . but also in their perceptions of the role of healthcare provid-
ers (as well as the expectations of the healthcare process and services). How might I 
have avoided this situation? Find specifi c evidence to support modifi cations to how 
you would have approached the facilitated group discussions with the Chin Burmese. 
Outline a diff erent, more culturally appropriate approach using your sources (be sure 
to cite your sources). 
Source: Smith EB, Sastre LR. “We didn't know”: An examination of health and nutrition knowledge, 
behaviors and clinical risk factors to guide a pilot health education intervention for refugees from Burma. 
J Refugee Global Health.  2019;2(2):article 2. doi:10.18297/rgh/vol2/iss2/2 
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
Journaling about experiences is one way to critically think about and analyze your feelings and 
thoughts on working with others diff erent from yourself.
Building Self-Awareness and Empathy
Th ink about a time when you were the only one of your race/ethnicity, religious group, age, or 
gender (or any other aspect of your identity that you feel strongly defi nes you) in a social situa-
tion. Write a 1-page journal style entry describing the social situation, why you were there, and 
how you felt to be the only one of your particular identity.
If you have never had this experience: Consider what it would feel like to move to a new coun-
try very diff erent from your own, where you do not speak the language very well, do not know 
many people, and are unfamiliar with the cultural practices. Write a 1-page journal style entry 
describing what this might feel like for you (any frustrations, stress, excitement). How would 
you adapt or learn about your new receiving country? What would you have to consider to gain 
employment, fi nd housing, and navigate your new city? What would you do if you had to bring 
aging parents and/or children with you to this new country (think about the potential issues with 
enrolling into programs/school, for example)?
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
List at least four reasons people migrate and describe how these reasons might aff ect 
their migration status (refugee, asylee, undocumented, etc.) and access to resources.
2. 
Defi ne cultural competence and describe three strategies that a public health prac-
titioner can use to eff ectively meet the social, cultural, and linguistic needs of the 
communities they serve.
3. 
Identify four key nutrition and health issues that the public health practitioner should 
consider when working with a global population. Identify and describe resources you 


===PAGE 274===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
249
could use to educate your clients on these nutrition and health issues (i.e., what materi-
als would you use?).
4. 
Describe the role that water plays in sustaining food security and ensuring optimal 
nutritional status at the global level.
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Evidence-Based Practice for Nutrition Care in the Global Setting
World Health Organization: e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions (eLENA). https://www.who.int/
elena/en
World Health Organization: Selected Guidelines and Reports on Nutrition Recommendations. https://www
.who.int/publications/guidelines/nutrition/en
World Health Organization. Regional Offi  ces (important health and nutrition resources grouped by region 
of the globe). https://www.who.int/about/who-we-are/regional-offi  ces
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Nutrition: Micronutrient Malnutrition. Global Health and 
Nutrition Resources. https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/micronutrient-malnutrition/resources/index.html
Rural Health Information Hub. Evidence-based toolkits: Community health worker toolkit. https://www
.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/community-health-workers/1
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Evidence Analysis Library (must be a member of the Academy of 
Nutrition and Dietetics to access this resource). https://www.andeal.org/projects.cfm
Develop Cultural Competence
Georgetown University Center for Child and Human Development: National Center for Cultural 
Competence. https://nccc.georgetown.edu
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically 
Appropriate Services (CLAS) in Health and Health Care. https://www.thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/clas
Expert Panel on Cultural Competence Education for Students in Medicine and Public Health (2012). Cultural 
competence education for students in medicine and public health: Report of an expert panel. Washington, 
DC: Association of American Medical Colleges and Association of Schools of Public Health. https://pcpcc.
org/sites/default/fi les/resources/Cultural%20Competence%20Education%20for%20Students%20in%20
Medicine%20%26%20Public%20Health.pdf
Increase Knowledge About Nutrition and Health Disparities
National Collaborative for Health Equity. http://www.nationalcollaborative.org
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. National Institute on Minority Health and Health 
Disparities. https://www.nimhd.nih.gov
World Health Organization. Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS provides snapshot on nutrition 
and health status of diff erent countries). https://www.who.int/nutrition/nlis/en
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service. Food Security in the United States (defi nitions, 
statistics, and tools used to measure food security in the United States). https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/
food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us
UN 2015–2030 Sustainable Development Goals. https:/www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/blog/2015/12/
sustainable-development-goals-kick-off -with-start-of-new-year
Educational and Support Resources for a Diverse Audience
U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. Research and Reports, Library of Materials: Health and 
Nutrition (educational resources available in multiple languages). https://refugees.org/research-reports
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Offi  ce of Refugee Resettlement: Refugee Health. https://
www.acf.hhs.gov/orr/programs/refugee-health


===PAGE 275===
250 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Immigrant and Refugee Health. https://www.cdc.gov/
immigrantrefugeehealth
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. United States-Mexico Public Health. https://www.cdc.gov/
usmexicohealth/index.html
Examples of the Migration Experience From Film and Literature
Fadiman A. Th e Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down: A Hmong Child, Her American Doctors, and the 
Collision of Two Cultures. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux; 1998.
Pipher M. Th e Middle of Everywhere: Helping Refugees Enter the American Community. New York, NY: 
Harcourt; 2002.
Martí nez R. Crossing Over: A Mexican Family on the Migrant Trail. New York, NY: Metropolitan Books; 2001.
Nazario S. Enrique’s Journey: Th e True Story of a Boy Determined to Reunite With His Mother. New York, NY: 
Ember; 2014.
Eggers D. What Is the What : Th e Autobiography of Valentino Achak Deng: A Novel. San Francisco, CA: 
McSweeney’s; 2006.
Falardeau P, director. Th e Good Lie. United States: Warner Bros., Summit Entertainment; 2014.
Schweitzer RD, Vromans L, Ranke G, Griffi  n J. Narratives of healing: A case study of a young Liberian 
refugee settled in Australia. Arts in Psychother. 2014;41(1):98–106.
GLOSSARY
Acculturation: Th e degree of assimilation to a diff erent culture (most commonly the dominant 
or receiving culture).
Asylee: A person who is seeking or has been granted political asylum or protection by the 
receiving nation or a nation outside his or her home country.
Community Health Worker (CHW) Model: A model whereby public health and social service 
workers are trained to provide health services and education to the communities they are close 
to. CHWs oft en share ethnicity, language, socioeconomic status, values, and life experiences 
with the community members they serve. CHWs are and should be chosen by the community 
and aid as a bridge to critical health services.
Cultural competence: Th e ability of providers and organizations to eff ectively deliver health-
care services (education, counseling, treatment) that meet the social, cultural, and linguistic 
needs of patients/clients and the community they serve.
Cultural humility: Self-awareness of one’s limitations regarding the depth of understanding of 
another culture’s beliefs, attitudes, values, and practices.
First 1,000 days of life: Th e period between conception and a child’s second birthday. Th is 
period is considered a critical window of development and growth.
Food insecurity–obesity paradox: Th e concept that those who experience food insecurity are 
paradoxically more likely to also be overweight or obese, particularly in middle and higher 
income countries. Th is association is best-documented in adult women. Findings are mixed 
among men and children. Th is paradox is oft en attributed to relying on cheap, calorie-dense, 
but nutrient-poor foods when the individual is food-insecure.
Food security: “When all people, at all times, have physical, social, and economic access to 
suffi  cient, safe and nutritious food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an 
active and healthy life.”16 Food insecurity is the opposite term and is characterized by anxiety 
related to acquiring food, compromising quality and compromising quantity of food.


===PAGE 276===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
251
Gross national income (GNI): A measurement of a country's income that includes all the 
income earned by a country's residents and businesses, including any income earned abroad. 
Income is defi ned as all employee compensation plus investment profi ts and includes earn-
ings from foreign sources. Typically measured per person (GNI per capita).
Human Development Index (HDI): A more comprehensive assessment of a country beyond 
economic growth alone and includes quality of life, education, and standard of living (GNI per 
capita).
Immigrant paradox: Assimilation or acculturation is associated with adverse health outcomes, 
while more recent immigrants are at reduced risk despite higher overall social and economic 
vulnerability.
Internally displaced people: Individuals who fl ee persecution or violence but who do not leave 
their home country.
Life-course approach (perspective): Framework that examines how individual health trajec-
tories vary and asserts that patterns can be predicted for populations and communities based 
on social, economic, and environmental exposures and experiences. Life is viewed as a contin-
uum of exposures, experiences, and interactions that intersect to infl uence the overall health 
(genetic, biological, and behavioral) of individuals and future generations.
Macronutrients: A class of nutrients that provide calories and therefore energy to the body. 
Carbohydrates, protein, and fat are the three macronutrients.
Malnutrition: Th e condition of having poor nutrition, caused by not having enough to eat, not 
having adequate intake of quality macronutrients that provide energy (carbohydrates, protein, 
fat) and micronutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and fi ber.
Microloan: A small sum of money lent at low interest to businesses and individuals. Providing 
microloans to small businesses and farms is under examination as one way to reduce poverty, 
empower the community, and improve the economy in low- and middle-income countries.
Micronutrients: A class of nutrients that do not provide calories but are necessary in small 
quantities for the optimal function of metabolism and growth in the body. Vitamins and min-
erals are the two types of micronutrients.
Migration: Movement of people from one place to another, whether it be inside their own 
country or to another country, with the intentions of settling there either temporarily or 
permanently.
Noncommunicable diseases (NCDs): Health conditions that cannot be transmitted to another 
person and which are most commonly associated with diet and lifestyle (e.g., diabetes, cardio-
vascular disease) but may also include others (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease).
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs): Nonprofi t organizations not affi  liated with a gov-
ernment entity.
Nutrition insecurity (NIS): A situation in which one or more of the qualities of nutrition secu-
rity are absent. Th is is the opposite condition to NS.
Nutrition security (NS): “Nutrition security requires that all people have access to a variety of 
nutritious foods and potable drinking water; knowledge, resources, and skills for healthy living; 
prevention, treatment, and care for diseases aff ecting nutrition status; and safety-net systems 
during crisis situations, such as natural disasters or deleterious social and political systems.”1 


===PAGE 277===
252 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
Remittance: Sending resources and money to family members back in their home country.
Resettlement: Transfer of refugees from one country (oft en the asylum country and/or neigh-
boring country from the one they have fl ed) to another country that has agreed to admit them 
and grant them permanent settlement.
Social determinants of health (SDOH): Conditions in the environments in which people are 
born, live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that aff ect a wide range of health, functioning, 
and quality-of-life outcomes and risks (CDC defi nition).
Stunting: A low height for age caused in relation to chronic starvation of both macro- and 
micronutrients that ultimately has aff ected growth and development of the individual.
Wasting: A reduction in overall body muscle mass in relation to acute starvation of protein and 
calories characterized by a low weight for height.
Water security: Th e capacity of a population to safeguard sustainable access to adequate quan-
tities of and acceptable quality water for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-
economic development for ensuring protection against waterborne pollution and water-related 
disasters and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of peace and political stability.39
REFERENCES
1. Nordin SM, Boyle M, Kemmer TM. Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: nutrition 
security in developing nations: sustainable food, water, and health. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2013;113(4):581–
595. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2013.01.025
2. Gross R, Schoeneberger H, Pfeifer H, Preuss H-JA. Th e four dimensions of food and nutrition security: 
defi nitions and concepts. Nutr Food Secur. 2000:1–17. http://www.ieham.org/html/docs/Th e_Four_
Dimensions_FNS_Defi nitions_and_Concepts.pdf
3. Th e World Bank: Data. How Does the World Bank Classify Countries? 2019. https://datahelpdesk
.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/378834-how-does-the-world-bank-classify-countries
4. Human Development Index (HDI). United Nations Development Programme: Human Development 
Reports. 2019. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-index-hdi
5. World Health Organization. Who We Are: History. 2019. https://www.who.int/about/who-we-are/
history
6. UNICEF. Nutrition: What we do. https://www.unicef.org/nutrition/index_action.html. Updated December 
24, 2015.
7. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. About FAO: What We Do. 2019. http://www
.fao.org/about/what-we-do/en
8. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). About FAO. 2019. http://www.fao
.org/about/en
9. World Food Programme. Overview. 2019. https://www1.wfp.org/overview
10. International Rescue Committee. Who We Are: Th e IRC’s Impact at a Glance. 2019. https://www.rescue
.org/page/ircs-impact-glance
11. International Rescue Committee. Nutrition at the International Rescue Committee. 2019. https://www
.rescue.org/resource/nutrition-international-rescue-committee?edme=true
12. Girard AW, Self JL, McAuliff e C, Olude O. Th e eff ects of household food production strategies on the 
health and nutrition outcomes of women and young children: a systematic review. Paediatr Perinat 
Epidemiol. 2012;26:205–222. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3016.2012.01282.x
13. World Obesity Federation. Global Obesity Observatory: Obesity Prevalence Worldwide. World Obesity; 
2018. https://www.worldobesitydata.org/map/overview-adults
14. World Health Organization. Report of the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity Implementation 
Plan: Executive Summary. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organizaton; 2017. https://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259349/WHO-NMH-PND-ECHO-17.1-eng.pdf


===PAGE 278===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
253
15. Perez-Escamilla R, Bermudez O, Buccini GS, et al. Nutrition disparities and the global burden of 
malnutrition. BMJ. 2018;361:k2252. doi:10.1136/bmj.k2252
16. Hamilton WL, Cook JT, Th ompson WW, et al. Household Food Security in the United States in 1995: 
Technical Report of the Food Security Measurement Project. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates; 1997:95. 
https://fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/fi les/TECH_RPT.PDF
17. FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO. Th e State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2017. 
Building Resilience for Peace and Food Security. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization; 
2017:S129.
18. Marriott BP, Olsho L, Hadden L, Connor P. Intake of added sugars and selected nutrients in the United 
States, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2003-2006. Crit Rev Food Sci 
Nutr. 2010;50:228–258. doi:10.1080/10408391003626223
19. Wallace TC, McBurney M, Fulgoni VL. Multivitamin/mineral supplement contribution to micronutrient 
intakes in the United States, 2007-2010. J Am Coll Nutr. 2014;33(2):94-102. doi:10.1080/07315724.201
3.846806
20. Alaimo K, Olson CM, Frongillo EA Jr. Low family income and food insuffi  ciency in relation to 
overweight in US children: is there a paradox? Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2001;155(10):1161–1167. 
doi:10.1001/archpedi.155.10.1161
21. Dinour LM, Bergen D, Yeh MC. Th e food insecurity-obesity paradox: a review of the literature and the 
role food stamps may play. J Am Diet Assoc. 2007;107(11):1952–1961. doi:10.1016/j.jada.2007.08.006
22. Gubert MB, Spaniol AM, Bortolini GA, Pérez-Escamilla R. Household food insecurity, nutritional 
status and morbidity in Brazilian children. Public Health Nutr. 2016;19:2240–2245. doi:10.1017/
S1368980016000239
23. Mahmudiono T, Nindya TS, Andrias DR, et al. Household food insecurity as a predictor of stunted 
children and overweight/obese mothers (SCOWT) in urban Indonesia. Nutrients. 2018;10:535. 
doi:10.3390/nu10050535
24. Pérez-Escamilla R, Kac G. Childhood obesity prevention: a life-course framework. Int J Obes Suppl. 
2013;3(suppl 1):S3–S5. doi:10.1038/ijosup.2013.2
25. Hernandez DC, Reesor LM, Murillo R. Food insecurity and adult overweight/obesity: gender and race/
ethnic disparities. Appetite. 2017;117:373–378. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2017.07.010
26. Laraia BA, Leak TM, Tester JM, Leung CW. Biobehavioral factors that shape nutrition in low-income 
populations: a narrative review. Am J Prev Med. 2017;52(2):S118–S126. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2016.08.003
27. Flórez KR, Dubowitz T, Ghosh-Dastidar M (Bonnie), et al. Associations between depressive 
symptomatology, diet, and body mass index among participants in the supplemental nutrition assistance 
program. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2015;115(7):1102–1108. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2015.01.001
28. Scott KA, Melhorn SJ, Sakai RR. Eff ects of chronic social stress on obesity. Curr Obes Rep. 2012;1(1):16–
25. doi:10.1007/s13679-011-0006-3
29. Richardson AS, Arsenault JE, Cates SC, Muth MK. Perceived stress, unhealthy eating behaviors, and 
severe obesity in low-income women. Nutr J. 2015;14:122. doi:10.1186/s12937-015-0110-4
30. Laraia B, Epel E, Siega-Riz AM. Food insecurity with past experience of restrained eating is a recipe for 
increased gestational weight gain. Appetite. 2013;65:178–184. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2013.01.018
31. Metallinos-Katsaras E, Siu E, Colchamiro R. Food insecurity's association with gestational weight gain 
varies by pre-pregnancy weight and parity. FASEB J. 2016;30(1_suppl):149.7. http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/
content/long/30/1_Supplement/149.7
32. Larson NI, Story MT. Food insecurity and weight status among U.S. children and families: a review of 
the literature. Am J Prev Med. 2011;40(2):166–173. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2010.10.028
33. Gross RS, Mendelsohn AL, Arana MM, Messito MJ. Food insecurity during pregnancy and breastfeeding 
by low-income Hispanic mothers. Pediatrics. 2019;143:e20184113. doi:10.1542/peds.2018-4113
34. World Health Organization. Global Nutrition Targets 2025: Policy Brief Series. (WHO/NMH/NHD/142). 
2014. https://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/globaltargets2025_policybrief_overview/en
35. Unicef Offi  ce of Research-Innocenti. Th e First 1,000 Days of Life: Th e Brain’s Window of Opportunity. 
2018. https://www.unicef-irc.org/article/958-the-first-1000-days-of-life-the-brains-window-of-
opportunity.html
36. WHO/UNICEF. Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Baseline. 
2017. https://www.unicef.org/publications/index_96611.html


===PAGE 279===
254 
II. Cultural Aspects of Public Health Nutrition
37. Prüss-Üstün A, Bos R, Gore F, Bartram J. Safer Water, Better Health: Costs, Benefi ts and Sustainability 
of Interventions to Protect and Promote Health. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 
2008.
38. Nounkeu DC. Assessment of the Relationship Between Water Insecurity, Hygiene Practices, and the 
Incidence of Diarrhea Among Children from Rural Households of the Menoua Division - West Cameroon. 
2017. http://libres.uncg.edu/ir/uncg/f/Nounkeu_uncg_0154M_12349.pdf
39. United Nations. UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme. 2019. Th e United Nations World Water 
Development Report 2019: Leaving No One Behind. 2019. http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-
sciences/environment/water/wwap
40. United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals: About the Sustainable Development Goals. 2015. https://
www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals
41. Colby BSL, Ortman JM. Projections of the Size and Composition of the U.S. Population: 2014 to 2060. 
Population Estimates and Predictions. 2015.
42. Kandel WA. Congressional Research Service Report: A Primer on U.S. Immigration Policy. 2018.
43. Refugee Facts. USA for UNHCR: Th e UN Refugee Agency. 2019. https://www.unrefugees.org/refugee
-facts/usa
44. USA for UNHCR: Th e UN Refugee Agency. Refugee Facts: What Is a refugee? 2019. https://www
.unrefugees.org/refugee-facts/what-is-a-refugee
45. Witsman K. Annual Flow Report: Lawful Permanent Residents August 2018. 2018. https://www.dhs.gov/
sites/default/fi les/publications/Lawful_Permanent_Residents_2017.pdf
46. Mossaad N. Annual Flow Report Refugees and Asylees: 2017. 2019. https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/
fi les/publications/Refugees_Asylees_2017.pdf
47. Schwartz SJ, Unger JB, Zamboanga BL, Szapocznik J. Rethinking the concept of acculturation: 
implications for theory and research. Am Psychol. 2010;65(4):237–251. doi:10.1037/a0019330
48. Nunnery DL, Dharod JM. Potential determinants of food security among refugees in the U.S.: an 
examination of pre- and post- resettlement factors. Food Secur. 2017;9(1):163–179. doi:10.1007/s12571
-016-0637-z
49. Baer J, Kutner M, Sabatini J, White S. Basic Reading Skills and the Literacy of America’s Least Literate 
Adults: Results From the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy (NAAL). Washington, DC: National 
Center for Education Statistics; 2009:1–66. https://nces.ed.gov/ pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2009481
50. De Muro P, Burchi F. Education for Rural People and Food Security: A Cross Country Analysis. Rome: 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2007.  https://ft p://ft p.fao.org/docrep/
fao/010/a1434e/a1434e.pdf
51. Dharod JM, Croom J, Sady CG, Morrell D. Dietary intake, food security, and acculturation among 
Somali refugees in the United States: results of a pilot study. J Immigr Refug Stud. 2011;9(1):82–97. 
doi:10.1080/15562948.2011.547827
52. Davidson G, Murray KE, Schweitzer R. Review of refugee mental health and wellbeing: Australian 
perspectives. Aust Psychol. 2008;43(January):160–174. doi:10.1080/00050060802163041
53. Garcini LM, Murray KE, Zhou A, et al. Mental health of undocumented immigrant adults in the United 
States: a systematic review of methodology and fi ndings. J Immigr Refug Stud. 2016;14(1):1–25. doi:10.
1080/15562948.2014.998849
54. Coleman-Jensen A, Rabbitt MP, Gregory C, Singh A. Household Food Security in the United States in 
2017, ERR-256. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2018.
55. Piwowarczyk L, Keane TM, Lincoln A. Hunger: the silent epidemic among asylum seekers and resettled 
refugees. Int Migr. 2008;46(1):59–77. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2435.2008.00436.x
56. Hadley C, Zodhiates A, Sellen DW. Acculturation, economics and food insecurity among refugees 
resettled in the USA: a case study of West African refugees. Public Health Nutr. 2007;10(4):405–412. 
doi:10.1017/S1368980007222943
57. Peterman JN, Wilde PE, Liang S, et al. Relationship between past food deprivation and current dietary 
practices and weight status among Cambodian refugee women in Lowell, MA. Am J Public Health. 
2010;100(10):1930–1937. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2009.175869
58. Th e World Bank: Press Release. Record high remittances to low- and middle-income countries in 2017. 
2018. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/04/23/record-high-remittances-to-low
-and-middle-income-countries-in-2017


===PAGE 280===
 
10. Global Health: Importance of Interprofessional Approach 
255
59. IASC. Guidelines for Integrating Gender-Based Violence Interventions in Humanitarian Action. 2015. 
https://interagencystandingcommittee.org/working-group/documents-public/iasc-guidelines-
integrating-gender-based-violence-interventions
60. Gottingen G, Stuttgart M, Weingarter L. Achieving Food and Nutrition Security: Actions to Meet the 
Global Challenge: A Training Course Reader. Feldafi ng; 2005.
61. Patil CL, Hadley C, Nahayo PD. Unpacking dietary acculturation among New Americans: results from 
formative research with African refugees. J Immigr Minor Health. 2009;11(5):342–358. doi:10.1007/
s10903-008-9120-z
62. Dharod JM, Croom J, Sady CG, Morrell D. Dietary intake, food security, and acculturation among 
Somali refugees in the United States: results of a pilot study. J Immigr Refug Stud. 2011;9(1):82–97. doi:
10.1080/15562948.2011.547827
63. World Health Organization. Nutrition: Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS). 2019. https://
www.who.int/nutrition/nlis/en
64. Nunnery D, Dharod J. Community health worker model: its implementation and importance in 
reaching refugee populations in the U.S. Int J Migr Health Soc Care. 2015;11(3):169–178. doi:10.1108/
IJMHSC-04-2014-0014
65. Black CM. A handbook for developing multicultural awareness. NASSP Bull. 1988;72(511):115–116. 
doi:10.1177/019263658807251131
66. Pedersen P. A Handbook for Developing Multicultural Awareness. Alexandria, VA: American Association 
for Counseling; 1988.
67. Foronda C, Baptiste D, Reinholdt MM, Ousman K. Cultural humility: a concept analysis. J Transcult 
Nurs. 2015;27(3):210–217. doi:10.1177/1043659615592677
68. UNHCR. IOC Launches Campaign to Bring Light to Refugee Camps. 2017.https://www.unhcr.org/
news/latest/2017/11/5a1307884/ioc-launches-campaign-bring-light-refugee-camps.html


===PAGE 282===
III
COMMUNITY ASSESSMENT, 
PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, 
AND EVALUATION


===PAGE 284===
11
COMMUNITY ASSESSMENTS 
IN PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
BECKY ADAMS AND KAREN L. PROBERT
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the basics and the complexities of conducting a community assessment.
2. Identify the most common models and tools to guide the community assessment process.
3. Describe the four categories of information to collect and analyze in conducting a com-
munity assessment oriented toward nutrition and physical activity needs.
4. Describe the value of collaboration and community engagement in conducting a com-
munity assessment and explain the diff erence between the two.
5. List at least two key points on the use of social media and innovative technology in con-
ducting a community assessment.
INTRODUCTION
Community assessment is not a public health philosophy or theory. Community assessment is 
something a health practitioner does. In simple terms, when conducting a community assess-
ment, one studies information about a community in order to identify strengths, opportunities, 
needs, wants, and concerns related to the health of people in the community.
For years, professionals in public health departments conducted community assessments; now, 
hospitals and clinics are also performing community assessments. Th is chapter begins by describ-
ing various terms and defi nitions for community assessment. Several national public health and 
healthcare organizations have developed community health assessment models and tools. Some 
of these models and tools are reviewed in this chapter. Th e reasons for conducting assessments 
and approaches to conducting community assessment are discussed in this chapter. Types of data, 
data sources, data collection methods, and challenges along with steps for developing a plan to 
assess the target population with key stakeholders are also described. Important skills needed by 
public health professionals and emerging technologies that may be used in community assess-
ment and programs are reviewed.


===PAGE 285===
260 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
CONDUCTING COMMUNITY-BASED NEEDS ASSESSMENTS 
AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCANS
Th is section includes terms used for community assessment, defi nitions of community assessment, 
reasons for conducting a community assessment, and approaches to community assessment.
Terminology
Community assessment, community health assessment, community needs assessment, environ-
mental scan, population-level needs assessment, community-based health needs assessment, 
population-based needs assessment, and so on are all “community assessment” terms with simi-
lar meaning. Th ese terms have slightly diff erent defi nitions, but the key points include gathering 
and studying information about a community in order to identify strengths, opportunities, needs, 
wants, and concerns related to the health of people in the community. Practitioners should know 
that these terms essentially mean the same thing while also understanding that some terms are 
specifi c to a particular model of community health assessment. Going forward, this text will use 
these terms interchangeably.
Defi nitions
Th ere are many defi nitions of community assessment, but the two provided here are used widely 
by public health and healthcare sectors. Th e Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
describes community health assessment (CHA) and community health needs assessment 
(CHNA) broadly as 
the process of community engagement; collection, analysis, and interpretation of data on 
health outcomes and health correlates/determinants (. . . health determinates); identifi ca-
tion of health disparities; and identifi cation of resources that can be used to address priority 
needs.1
Th e Public Health Accreditation Board (PHAB) defi nes community health assessment as 
a systematic examination of the health status indicators for a given population that is used 
to identify key problems and assets in a community. Th e ultimate goal of a community 
health assessment is to develop strategies to address the community’s health needs and 
identifi ed issues.2
Another term related to collecting information about a community is “environmental scan.” 
In the public health fi eld, the term is not clearly defi ned, nor has it been evaluated. It is used to 
describe an approach to community assessment that involves reviewing stakeholders, health 
data, focus group fi ndings, and key informant interview results. Th e phrase has also been used 
to describe an audit of the types of food available in retail stores. In the business fi eld, where 
environmental scan has been well-defi ned, environmental scanning is a process used to assess 
internal strengths and challenges and external opportunities and threats. Decision-makers 
use environmental scans to collect, organize, and analyze data on their assets and shortcom-
ings in external and internal environments to guide strategic planning and decision-making. 
Environmental scanning integrates multiple strategies for information collection. Th e purpose 
of an environmental scan is to understand context; collect information; and identify resources, 
links, and gaps.3 Given this description, the increasing popularity of this concept in public health 
practice is understandable.


===PAGE 286===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
261
Justifi cation
Th ere are two overarching reasons for conducting a community health assessment: it is good 
practice and/or it is required. Successful programs address the needs and wants of the commu-
nity, and the best way to fi nd out what a community needs and wants is to conduct a community 
assessment.4 Community health assessments are used to identify unmet needs; prioritize the use 
of resources; guide activities of coalitions, organizations, or agencies; and guide advocacy eff orts 
or policy change. For example, United Way conducts periodic community health needs assess-
ments to help direct funding and resources toward identifi ed priority needs.5
Th e second reason for conducting a community health needs assessment is that it may be a 
required activity for a public health or healthcare entity. Th e following is a list of four institutions 
that require community assessment.
Nonprofi t community hospitals. Th rough the Patient Protection and Aff ordable Care Act of 
2010, all nonprofi t hospitals are now required to conduct a community health needs assessment 
every 3 years. If this assessment is not conducted, the hospital will be assigned a tax of $50,000 
per year because the hospital is not compliant. Hospitals are to consult public health and other 
community partners with information relevant to the health needs of the community served by 
the hospital.6 Neither the law nor the subsequent regulations have provided much detail on what 
is included in the community health needs assessment.
Public health agency accreditation. A community health assessment is a prerequisite of public 
health accreditation under PHAB standards, and the standards address data collection, data anal-
ysis, and health assessment results.7
Community health center (CHC). According to amendments of the Public Health Services 
Act, CHCs conduct a community health assessment in order to be eligible for formal designation 
and federal funding. And CHC assessments must include the numbers and types of health pro-
fessionals to aid in designation as Medically Underserved Areas or Health Professional Shortage 
Areas.5
Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Block Grant Program. Th e Title V Maternal and Child 
Health legislation requires states to complete a statewide, comprehensive needs assessment every 
5 years. Th e Title V legislation (Section 505(a)(1)) requires the state, as part of the application, to 
prepare and
transmit a comprehensive statewide Needs Assessment every fi ve years that identifi es 
(consistent with the health status goals and national health objectives) the need for: (1) 
Preventive and primary care services for pregnant women, mothers and infants up to age 
one; (2) Preventive and primary care services for children; and (3) Services for children 
with special healthcare needs. Findings from the Five-Year Needs Assessment serve as the 
cornerstone for the development of a fi ve-year Action Plan for the State MCH Block Grant.8
Some states rely on community health assessments completed by local agencies to develop the 
statewide needs assessment.
Funding institutions. And less specifi c, but still a requirement, conducting a community needs 
assessment is a prerequisite to a grant application or a requirement aft er grant funding is obtained.
At the community level, many of these required community assessments will overlap. To avoid 
burnout by community members and health practitioners, reduce duplication of eff orts, maxi-
mize limited resources, and obtain comprehensive data and information about the community, 
it is worthwhile for public health and healthcare agencies to work together when conducting 
community assessments. In fact, the CDC developed the Community Health Improvement Logic 


===PAGE 287===
262 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Model (Figure 11.1), which depicts the alignment between the processes and expectations of 
tax-exempt hospitals, public health agencies, and other community-based organizations.5
A 2017 resource developed by the Association of State and Territorial Health Offi  cials and the 
National Organization of State Offi  ces of Rural Health reviews the potential for nonprofi t hospi-
tals and public health agencies to collaborate on community health assessments. Th is resource 
also includes models of collaboration from several states.9,10 Th e next section includes details for 
some of the most common community health assessment models. In general, however, there 
are two approaches to the process of conducting a community health assessment. A community 
health assessment may examine a broad spectrum of issues important to the health of the popula-
tion within the community, and the results identify top health concerns. For example, following a 
comprehensive community health assessment, adult obesity and infant mortality could emerge as 
top health concerns of the community. Th e other approach to a community health assessment is 
to orient toward a particular disease, the needs of a particular population, or specifi c risk factors, 
such as poor nutrition and physical inactivity. For example, a community-based health needs 
assessment may be conducted in a specifi c neighborhood to identify the barriers to and opportu-
nities for healthy eating among adolescents.
FIGURE 11.1 Community Health Improvement Logic Model.
CHA, community health assessment; CHIP, Children’s Health Insurance Program; CHNA, community health needs 
assessment.
Source: From Barnett K. Best Practices for Community Health Needs Assessment and Implementation Strategy 
Development: A Review of Scientific Methods, Current Practices, and Future Potential Report Proceedings from a 
Public Health Forum and Interview of Experts. Oakland, CA: Public Health Institute; 2012. http://www.phi.org/uploads/
application/files/dz9vh55o3bb2x56lcrzyel83fwfu3mvu24oqqvn5z6qaeiw2u4.pdf
Community Health Improvement:
A Framework to Promote Best Practices in
Assessment, Planning, and Implementation
Reports
§ 501(r) Requirements,
Form 990 Schedule H
Accreditation Requirements
State and Community-based Analyses of CHNA/Implementation
Strategy Public Reports
Community Benefit
26 USC § 501(c)(3), IRS Ruling 69-545
T R A N S P A R E N C Y
Accountability Mechanisms
Monitoring and
Evaluation
Data and Analytic Support Platform
CHNA/CHA
Implementation
Strategy/CHIP
Implementation
Hospital, Health
Department United Way
and Others
COLLABORATING
Improved
Community Health
Outcomes?
Assuring Shared Ownership of the Process among Stakeholders (e.g., formal agreements)?
Assuring Ongoing Involvement of Community Members
Key Issues to Address
to Promote
Alignment between
Accreditation,
NP Hospital CB, and
Other Community-
Oriented Processes
-Arranging Assessments
that Span Jurisdictions
-Using Small Area Analysis
to Identify Communities
with Health Disparities
-Collecting and Using
Information on Social
Determinants of Health
-Collecting Information on
Community Assets
-Using Explicit Criteria and
Processes to Set Priorities
(use of evidence to guide
decision-making)
-Assuring Shared
Investment and
Commitments of Diverse
Stakeholders
-Collaborating Across
Sectors to Implement
Comprehensive Strategies
-Participatory Monitoring
and Evaluation of
Community Health
Improvement Efforts
D
E
P
A
R
T
M
E
N
T
 
O
F
 
CENTERS    FOR    DISEASE*
CONTROL AND PREVENTION
CDC


===PAGE 288===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
263
COMMUNITY HEALTH ASSESSMENT MODELS
National public health organizations and national healthcare organizations have developed tools 
to help professionals conduct a community assessment. Th e diff erent tools, or models, refl ect dif-
ferent priorities. Each model varies in the number of steps involved, the people to engage in the 
process, the types of data to collect, and the approach to the task. Th ere are also community health 
assessment tools that provide guidance and resources but do not prescribe a specifi c model. In 
addition, because assessment is the base for planning programs and services, some of the com-
munity assessment tools also include the steps that come aft er assessment including prioritizing, 
program design, implementation, and evaluation.
Key components of each model include building an assessment team, defi ning the commu-
nity, deciding the purpose, engaging the community, collecting and analyzing information, and 
reporting fi ndings. If program planning is part of the model, then prioritizing fi ndings, develop-
ing goals and objectives, designing interventions, and evaluating actions are also included. In the 
following, we review two models used primarily by public health entities, one model designed 
for nonprofi t hospitals, a website with tools for anyone conducting a community-based needs 
assessment, and a model used when the only interest is population-based nutrition and physical 
activity.
Mobilizing for Action Through Planning and Partnership (MAPP)
MAPP is a community assessment tool developed by the National Association of County and City 
Health Offi  cials (NACCHO), which is a national nonprofi t organization representing city and 
county public health departments. Th is model (Figure 11.2) is not exclusively about community 
assessment, and in fact, the resource is described as helping with community health assessment 
and community health improvement planning. Th ere is a PDF document, but the resource is 
also available online (www.naccho.org/programs/public-health-infrastructure/performance-im-
provement/community-health-assessment/mapp) with modifi able documents and worksheets, 
webinars, presentation slides, and success stories. Two unique features of this community assess-
ment model are that (a) one of the assessment steps is focused entirely on the capacity of the local 
public health system and (b) the approach permits a focus on health equity, and NACCHO has 
supplementary resources to help a community address health inequity.11
Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation (CHANGE)
Th e CHANGE tool was developed by the CDC, which is the nation’s federal agency focused on 
health promotion and disease prevention. Th ere are multiple PDF documents, Excel spreadsheets, 
and success stories that are accessible on CDC’s website (www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state
-local-programs/change-tool/index.html). Th ree unique features to this community assessment 
model are that (a) it is data-intensive with several specifi c questions to ask of major institutions 
in the community plus formatted Excel spreadsheets to help gather and organize data and infor-
mation; (b) it focuses on the key factors that aff ect chronic disease including tobacco exposure, 
healthy eating, physical activity, and disease management; and (c) it allows tracking of commu-
nity-level systems changes, for example, food and beverage choices for school students, worksite 
promotion of using stairwells, or healthy food options at meetings or events.12
CHANGE describes fi ve phases to community assessment and then provides instruction and 
resources for eight action steps. Th e fi ve phases of this process are commitment, assessment, plan-
ning, implementation, and evaluation (Figure 11.3).12 Th e eight action steps are (a) assemble the 


===PAGE 289===
264 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
FIGURE 11.2 MAPP Academic Model. The six phases of MAPP are: (1) organize for success/
partnership development, (2) visioning, (3) four MAPP assessments, (4) identify strategic 
issues, (5) formulate goals and strategies, and (6) action cycle.
MAPP, Mobilizing for Action through Planning and Partnership.
Source: From National Association of County and City Health Officials. Mobilizing for Action through Planning and 
Partnerships (MAPP). https://www.naccho.org/programs/public-health-infrastructure/performance-improvement/
community-health-assessment/mapp/phase-1-organize-for-success-partnership-development
Formulate Goals and Strategies
Identify Strategic Issues 
Evaluate
Plan
Implement
Four MAPP Assessments
Visioning
Partnership
Development
Organize for
Success
St
re
ng
th
s 
As
se
ss
me
nt
s
Co
mm
un
ity
 T
he
me
s a
nd
Sy
st
em
 A
ss
es
sm
en
t
Lo
ca
l P
ubl
ic 
He
alt
h
Co
m
mu
nit
y 
He
alt
h
St
atu
s A
ss
es
sm
en
t
As
se
ss
me
nt
Fo
rc
es
 of
 C
ha
ng
e
Action
FIGURE 11.3 CHANGE Model for community assessment and action.
CHANGE, Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation.
Source: From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Change Process and the CHANGE Tool. 2018. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change-tool/community-change-process.html
COMMUNITY
CHANGE
PROCESS
E
V
A
L
U
A
TI
O
N
C
O
M
MI
T
M
E
N
T
A
S
S
E
S
S
M
E
N
T
P
L
A
N
NI
N
G
I
M
P
L
E
M
E
N
T
A
TI
O
N


===PAGE 290===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
265
community team, (b) develop team strategy, (c) review all fi ve CHANGE sectors, (d) gather data, 
(e) review data gathered, (f) enter data, (g) review consolidated data (includes four substeps and 
worksheets), and (h) build the community action plan.13
Community Health Assessment Toolkit
Th e Association for Community Health Improvement (ACHI) is an affi  liate of the American 
Hospital Association and the Health Research & Educational Trust. With funding from CDC, 
ACHI produced the Community Health Assessment Toolkit, which can help a nonprofi t hospital 
meet the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirement of conducting a community health needs 
assessment every 3 years. Th e toolkit includes nine steps starting with “Refl ect and Strategize” and 
ending with “Evaluate Progress.” Steps three and four are “Defi ne the Community” and “Collect 
and Analyze Data,” respectively. Th is is not a stand-alone tool; instead, the toolkit provides a 
framework for the community assessment process and includes links to other resources for each 
of the nine steps.14
Community Tool Box
Maintained by the Center for Community Health and Development at the University of Kansas, 
the Community Tool Box is used around the world by people working to build healthier com-
munities. It includes information, checklists, templates, examples, and PowerPoint presenta-
tions summarizing information in each section. Th e Community Tool Box covers topics such 
as partnerships, assessing community needs and resources, building leadership, and sustain-
ing the work.15 Th e information in this resource can be used to complement a community 
health needs assessment process being conducted using another model, or it can be used to 
provide step-by-step guidance to conducting an assessment and building an intervention in a 
community.
Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning
Moving to the Future is a resource produced by the Association of State Public Health Nutritionists, 
which is a nonprofi t membership organization of public health nutrition professionals. Moving 
to the Future is a program planning resource that emphasizes community assessment. It is exclu-
sively focused on helping practitioners develop community-based nutrition and physical activity 
programs. Th is model is an online resource (movingtothefuture.org) with information, work-
sheets, and tip sheets in PDF and Word format.16 General or broad community health needs 
assessments typically do not address the community-based food, nutrition, and physical activity 
needs or opportunities. An assessment with an area of interest needs to be done as a stand-alone 
or supplemental assessment.
METHODS FOR DATA COLLECTION AND CHALLENGES
Primary and secondary data are used in a community health assessment. Primary data is data 
that is collected by the practitioners involved in the community health needs assessment process. 
Secondary data is collected by someone else, typically a government agency such as the U.S. 
Census Bureau or a state health department. Methods for data collection depend on the category 
of data collected. For example, if the category of data to be collected is community opinion, then 
the method will likely be primary data collection and the practitioner might be administering 


===PAGE 291===
266 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
community opinion surveys or organizing a photovoice project. If the data being collected is 
on the demographics or health status of the population, then the method will be secondary data 
collection.
As noted previously, each community assessment model calls for diff erent types of informa-
tion to be gathered. All models do, however, direct users to gather demographics and health status 
data. But the collection of information to describe community opinions and the community envi-
ronment varies substantially across the models. Th inking broadly about community health needs 
and assets, the categories of information to gather and analyze can be organized into four buckets: 
(a) population data, (b) opinion and perception information, (c) community environment, and 
(d) public policy environment.17
Categories
Population data includes sociodemographic descriptors and indicators of the health and nutri-
tional status of the selected population. Th ere are many population data points to consider; exam-
ples include poverty rates, education levels, race, ethnicity, infant mortality, adult obesity, physical 
inactivity, diabetes monitoring, breastfeeding rates, and so on. Th e CDC, the Council of State and 
Territorial Epidemiologists, and the National Association of Chronic Disease Directors developed 
124 chronic disease indicators that uniformly defi ne and provide reliable datasets for chronic 
diseases and associated risk factors. Th ere are 38 nutrition, physical activity, and weight status 
indicators, such as prepregnancy overweight or obesity, infants breastfeeding at 6 months, and no 
leisure-time physical activity among adults aged over 18 years.18
Opinion and perception information includes perceived needs, priorities, norms, and values 
of the priority population and other constituencies and stakeholders. Some examples of ways 
to collect this information include conducting a media survey, photovoice project, community 
opinion/concern survey, key informant interviews, and listening sessions.17
Community environment includes programs, services, and resources available in a community 
and their quality attributes, plus community infl uencers and social networks. One can gather 
this information using checklists, audits, surveys, or interviews. A few specifi c examples include 
asset mapping, walkability audit, Nutrition Environment Measures Survey (NEMS), and Physical 
Activity Resource Assessment (PARA).17
Th e public policy environment involves identifying relevant public policy issues and their sta-
tus, including related legislation, regulation, ordinances, and so on at local, state, and national 
levels as well as national standards and guidelines from government agencies.17 Th is is the point 
at which a practitioner can gather information on the social determinants of health by consid-
ering “incidental” laws and policies that aff ect income, education, housing, or other factors that 
have an indirect impact on health outcomes. Two other types of policy to consider include (a) 
“infrastructural” laws and policies that authorize development and fi nancing of institutions and 
programs meant to improve the public’s health (e.g., Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act) and facil-
itate the uptake of social services and (b) “interventional” approaches meant to limit exposure 
to potentially harmful materials (e.g., banning soda on children’s menus), discourage unhealthy 
behaviors (e.g., junk food tax), encourage healthy behaviors (e.g., calorie labeling on restaurant 
menus), or engage in a combination of such approaches.
Th e community and public policy environments, described earlier, and their eff ect on the food 
and physical activity habits of people have generated a lot of interest among researchers and prac-
titioners. As a result, there are several tools to assess the environment as it aff ects the foods we eat 
and level of physical activity in our daily life. Th ere is not, yet, however, consensus on the single 


===PAGE 292===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
267
way to approach the “environment” categories of community nutrition and physical activity needs 
assessment. Several tools exist to assess the physical activity environment and the food and nutri-
tion environment, and some are reviewed in the following.
Th e Built Environment Assessment Tool measures the core features and qualities of the built 
environment that aff ect health, especially walking, biking, and other types of physical activity. An 
example fi nding from this assessment could be that a community has several public parks, but 
they are located in remote, out-of-the-way areas of the community.19
To determine the quantity and quality of physical activity resources in a community one can 
complete the PARA instrument. Th e PARA is a brief, 1-page, check-box instrument used to assess 
the type, features, amenities, quality, and incivilities of a variety of physical activity resources (e.g., 
parks, churches, schools, sports facilities, fi tness centers, community centers, and trails).
Th e food environment has been defi ned to include the physical, social, and person-centered 
environments that all play a role in what people choose to eat.20 Measuring the physical food 
environment considers location and quality of food available and example tools to use include 
geographic information systems (GISs) and observational scans or audits. Measuring social envi-
ronment assesses social support; policies, practices and rules; and parent practices as related to 
food. An example survey is the School Health Policy and Practice Survey, a CDC-conducted 
survey. Measuring person-centered environment assesses perceptions of availability, access, social 
norms, and social support; phone interviews and questionnaires are example tools for gathering 
this information.20
Th e nutrition environment is any place where people buy or eat food and is almost a subcat-
egory of physical food environment described in the previous paragraph. Th e Center for Health 
Behavior, University of Pennsylvania, developed and/or inspired NEMS (https://nems-upenn
.org/) for several places—restaurants, stores, corner stores, vending machines, grab-and-go food 
outlets, farmers’ markets, hospitals, and national parks, plus a survey for perceived nutrition 
environment.21
Challenges
Th ere are challenges in conducting community health assessments. Th e three that almost always 
come up for practitioners are (a) gathering too much or not enough information, (b) the limita-
tions of health indicator data at the local level, and (c) the confl ict between community opinion/
perception fi ndings and objective fi ndings.
Regarding the quantity of information to gather, a practitioner can either get bogged down 
in gathering too much data and information or decide the whole process is too much and only 
gather a small amount of information. To answer the question “How much information does one 
need to gather?”, use common sense. Collect as much information as possible, given the time 
frame and capacity. At a minimum, gather some information from each of the following cate-
gories: population data, opinions, community environment, and public policy environment. In 
general, the more information one has, the better. However, this must be balanced with making 
this step manageable and with getting the work done in a reasonable amount of time. To avoid 
not gathering enough information, remember that the point of community assessment is to learn 
about the community; so be sure to gather and analyze information in an area that is unfamiliar. 
Gathering more data and information during the next community assessment in the future is 
always a possibility.
In a perfect world, local-level health status and nutrition and physical activity behavior data 
would be available to practitioners conducting a community-based health needs assessment. 


===PAGE 293===
268 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
However, this type of data is typically only available at the state level and at county or city level 
for large population centers. For example, state-level data are available on the percentage of peo-
ple who consume fruits and vegetables daily and the percentage of people who do not consume 
any vegetables or fruits, but this information is less likely to be available for a small area like a 
neighborhood or a small county/parish/borough. Th ere is recognition of the need to have data 
at smaller units of analysis (e.g., zip code, census tract) in order to identify where there may be 
high prevalence for particular health conditions or to help identify pockets of risk in a larger 
population center.5 Until such community-specifi c health, nutrition, and physical activity data are 
available, there are options. Th e following is a list of tips if data are not available for the specifi c 
community one is working with.
 
■
Use a subcategory of data that the state does tabulate and that is similar. For example, 
the state may break down the data into these categories: rural, urban, or suburban, or 
by geographic region.
 
■
Ask the state health agency and/or an academic institution for help in calculating data 
for a specifi c community or region. State health agencies may have access to local-level 
data and may help generate data that will meet the practitioners’ needs.
 
■
Use data from a community that is similar in demographics and geography.
 
■
Use program data. Be sure everyone understands the limits of the data. For example, 
the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) 
program collects body mass index (BMI) data on children in the program. A commu-
nity health assessment team could use this data to assess childhood overweight in a 
specifi c community. However, everyone needs to be clear that the data are for children 
5 years old and younger from low-income families.
 
■
Use state or even national data, but this choice should be a last resort.22
Another common challenge in conducting a community health needs assessment occurs when 
community perception fi ndings diff er from results of objective fi ndings.23,24 An example would 
be if the community perception reports indicate no access to healthy foods in neighborhoods, 
but through census tract data, practitioners discover several retailers with healthier food choices. 
Knowing that the community perceives things diff erently than what the objective data show is 
essential to developing community-based programs and services. Exactly how to address this 
confl ict will vary depending on many factors.
 
■
Health professionals can ignore the fi ndings from the community with the risk of 
alienating the community and seeing failed programs and services over time.
 
■
At the other extreme, health practitioners could develop programs and services that 
directly and solely address the community perceptions. For example, based on com-
munity opinion, the top adolescent health concern is teen substance abuse; yet, recent 
data show a steady decline in use of illegal substances over the past 5 years and an 
alarming increase in percentage of teens not doing any leisure-time physical activ-
ity. Th e community’s health planning team that is conducting the community needs 
assessment could decide to work with the community and address teen substance 
abuse. Th en over time the team might develop interventions to help increase levels of 
physical activity among school-age children.
 
■
Th e third option to dealing with the situation of community perception confl icting 
with objective assessment results is to engage the community and work together to 
identify solutions that address the diff erent fi ndings. Th is solution will be the most 
successful in both the short and the long term.


===PAGE 294===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
269
BASIC NEEDS ASSESSMENT: DEVELOPING A PLAN 
FOR THE TARGET POPULATION
Using the tools and principles identifi ed throughout this chapter, it is important to plan your 
assessment. Community assessment provides an opportunity to engage many stakeholders in the 
community. Engaging diverse community members during the planning phase of assessment can 
facilitate more robust engagement and identifi cation of a broader range of resources.
Once the target population has been identifi ed, develop a planning group that represents the 
community. Th e role of this group may be to oversee, coordinate, and/or conduct parts of the 
assessment. It is important to determine the goals of the assessment and how much or what kind 
of data are needed to answer questions in order to achieve the goals of the assessment. It is neces-
sary to identify resources such as human resources, capacity/skills in various aspects of commu-
nity assessment, existing data sources or previous/concurrent assessments, and funding available 
for primary data collection. Develop a plan that includes methods for gathering information, how 
to reach community members for input, how the data will be analyzed, who will collect and ana-
lyze the data, and a realistic timeline. Decide on a method of documentation and presentation of 
the results of the assessment and assign tasks. Present the plan to the planning committee, make 
adjustments as needed, and implement the plan.25
SKILLS IN ASSESSMENT OF COMMUNITIES
Th e previous sections have defi ned and described community health needs assessment. Th is sec-
tion reviews the skills and principles necessary to successfully conduct a community health assess-
ment. According to the Council on Linkages Between Academia and Public Health Practice,26 
there are eight skill areas for public health professionals:
 
■
Analytical/assessment skills
 
■
Policy development/program planning skills
 
■
Communication skills
 
■
Cultural competency skills
 
■
Community dimensions of practice skills
 
■
Public health sciences skills
 
■
Financial planning and management skills
 
■
Leadership and systems thinking skills
Obviously, in conducting a community-based health assessment, a practitioner needs all the abil-
ities under the analytical/assessment skills area, which include identifying and understanding data, 
turning data into information for action, assessing needs and assets to address community health 
needs, developing community health assessments, and using evidence for decision-making.26 Many 
of the abilities under the areas of communication, cultural competency, community dimensions of 
practice, and leadership and systems thinking are also needed for a practitioner to successfully con-
duct a community needs assessment. For example, an ability under communication skills is “solicit-
ing and using community input,” which would help a practitioner collect perceptions and opinions of 
community members; and an ability under leadership and systems thinking is “creating opportunities 
for collaboration among public health, healthcare, and other organizations,” which is an essential skill 
when working with other health organizations also conducting a community health assessment.26


===PAGE 295===
270 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
In addition to practitioners having the necessary skills to conduct a community health needs 
assessment, in 2013 a set of basic principles for approaching the work to improve community 
health were written to help implement the Aff ordable Care Act’s requirement for not-for-profi t 
hospitals to conduct a community health needs assessment every 3 years. Considering the public 
health literature, seven basic principles were proposed:
 
■
Multisector collaborations that support shared ownership of all phases of community 
health improvement, including assessment, planning, investment, implementation, and 
evaluation
 
■
Proactive, broad, and diverse community engagement to improve results
 
■
A defi nition of community that encompasses both a signifi cant enough area to allow 
for population-wide interventions and measurable results, and includes a targeted 
focus to address disparities among subpopulations
 
■
Maximum transparency to improve community engagement and accountability
 
■
Use of evidence-based interventions and encouragement of innovative practices with 
thorough evaluation
 
■
Evaluation to inform a continuous improvement process
 
■
Use of the highest quality data pooled from, and shared among, diverse public and 
private sources27
BUILDING SUSTAINED STAKEHOLDER RELATIONSHIPS 
AND ENGAGEMENT
Collaboration is fundamental to community assessment. Four of the seven principles to imple-
menting a community needs assessment, listed earlier, had the theme of collaboration and/or 
engagement. Also, as noted previously in this chapter, there is likely to be more than one com-
munity organization conducting a community health assessment, and a collaborative relationship 
is inevitable. And, in the models for conducting a community-based health assessment (covered 
previously in this chapter), a team or committee is assumed and integral, or forming a team is 
a stand-alone step in the community assessment process. Plus cross-sectoral collaboration is a 
built-in component of Public Health 3.0, a model for governmental public health defi ned in 2017 
and that goes beyond the traditional public health department functions and programs.28
Th ere are several benefi ts to working with partner organizations when conducting a community 
health needs assessment. Other organizations that have either conducted or plan to conduct an 
assessment can share information and fi ndings. With a diverse coalition, there is a greater chance of 
successfully addressing health inequities. Collaboration among organizations conducting commu-
nity health assessments can help reduce fatigue among community members asked to participate. 
And collaboration during the assessment phase will likely increase partner and community mem-
ber engagement in the intervention and evaluation phases of community health improvement.
Who needs to be involved? Multiple agencies should be involved in this work, and many factors 
aff ect the fi nal roster of partners.
1. 
Expertise. Include someone who has experience collecting and analyzing community 
data and information. If this expertise is not available, seek locally to involve someone 
from a university, college, or state health agency who is knowledgeable about data col-
lection. Also, state offi  ces of rural health have a history of helping rural communities 


===PAGE 296===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
271
with needs assessment and are a good place to fi nd such expertise. Involvement of 
experts could be limited, as an advisor to provide technical assistance; the person 
would not have to fully engage in the community health needs assessment process. 
2. 
Topic. Th e content focus of the community assessment will also infl uence who is part 
of the team. A food security coalition will have diff erent people than a local hospital’s 
community health assessment committee.
3. 
Committee structure. Th e community needs assessment team may require people to 
engage at diff erent levels. For example, there might be a working committee of seven to 
10 people from multiple agencies that meets monthly to review and analyze informa-
tion and then every 4 months holds an open meeting to update anyone who is inter-
ested in the progress and to solicit comments.
4. 
Community size. A rural community may have four agencies, total, that work on nutri-
tion and physical activity related issues, whereas an urban or suburban community 
could have hundreds of agencies off ering nutrition and physical activity programs and 
services. So, in a rural community, everyone is involved, but in an urban or suburban 
community not everyone can be involved. A state-level community assessment, in 
which the community is the whole state, may also struggle to get all relevant agencies 
involved. 
5. 
Interest. Not everyone is interested in the work to be done in conducting a commu-
nity assessment. Some people are uncomfortable with data or are uninterested in 
assessing the community perspective or environment, and some only want to work 
on implementation. A person’s interest in the community assessment work should be 
considered.
6. 
Grant funding. A funder may recommend agencies or disciplines that should be 
involved.
7. 
Philosophy. A group’s philosophy may be to continually invite new people to partic-
ipate, whereas another committee might draw up the list of agencies to involve with 
community assessment and not open up participation until they move to a new phase, 
such as implementation.4 
8. Health equity. By engaging specifi c stakeholders, a community health needs assess-
ment team can assess a community’s health disparities and engage the right people to 
develop strategies to achieve health equity. Th e types of stakeholders to include are as 
follows:

{
Population groups that are aff ected by health disparities due to racism, gender 
inequity, socioeconomic status, and other structural inequities

{
Individuals with decision-making ability and the knowledge and power to 
infl uence policies, investments, and laws that have caused (or can prevent) health 
inequity

{
Individuals with expertise in data analysis and measurement of social, economic, 
and health inequity indicators

{
Groups that can communicate the causes of health inequities in a way that inspires 
people to work on achieving health equity

{
Facilitators that can create an environment that leads to productive discussions 
about health inequities and possible solutions or collaborative action10


===PAGE 297===
272 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Many resources exist to guide a community health needs assessment team in their work 
together. Th e community health assessment models reviewed previously in this chapter (MAPP, 
CHANGE, and Community Tool Box) have guidance, worksheets, videos, sample materials, and 
similar materials for use by practitioners. Th ere is a relatively new trend in community health 
assessment to use the principles from community-based participatory research (CBPR). A 
nationally developed toolkit using CBPR as a model does not exist, but journal articles describing 
the process used in specifi c communities do exist.29–31
Diff erent from collaboration and partnering, but similar in that the practice involves work-
ing with others, is engagement. Engaging people from the community when conducting a needs 
assessment will greatly increase community support of the fi ndings and next steps, plus it is an 
eff ective strategy to reduce health inequalities.32 Community engagement involves members 
of the public in agenda-setting, decision-making, and program- and policy-forming activities. 
Without community engagement, the work of conducting a community health needs assessment 
is completed solely by professionals. Th is was the practice for many years; now, however, commu-
nity members are involved in the community needs assessment process. Th e level of engagement 
ranges from professionals simply sharing information with community members to freely sup-
porting independently made community decisions.32 Generally, a high level of authentic commu-
nity engagement yields more accurate community assessment fi ndings and greater success in the 
programs and services developed as a result of the community assessment.
Social Media, Innovative Technologies, and Communication Strategies
Community health needs assessment has a long history of being conducted by governmental public 
health agencies, which means the work has been poorly funded; plus the scrutiny and accountability 
of public funds decreases the opportunities to try new, untested approaches, which can hinder inno-
vation. As a result, newer technology is slow to be adapted. Public health leaders have called upon the 
fi eld to develop new technology tools to help practitioners conduct community health assessments.28,33 
Th e models and tools for conducting community-based health needs assessments do not address using 
social media or innovative technologies in collecting community information, nor do these models 
provide guidance on using new or unique strategies to communicate assessment fi ndings.
Despite this lack of guidance in existing community assessment tools and minimal informa-
tion in the peer-reviewed literature, there are obvious potential uses and clear benefi ts. According 
to anecdotal reports and case studies, professionals use social media and innovative technologies 
to engage people in tasks such as collecting community opinion, assessing the community envi-
ronment, and reporting information out to team members and community members. Here is an 
example from a regional planning advisory council in Central Arkansas, and the group of local 
governments is called Metroplan.
A collaborative eff ort brought “health” to the table with Metroplan’s 2030 strategic plan, 
Imagine Central Arkansas. Because community input was deemed critical in shaping the mission 
of Imagine Central Arkansas, Metroplan used a mixture of low- and high-tech methods to engage 
citizens and other stakeholders across an urban area and several rural counties in a dialogue about 
the future.34 Imagine Central Arkansas used:
 
■
A “Kickoff  Event”
 
■
A series of mobile workshops throughout the region. Th e workshops were held at 
places that people visit daily such as malls, parks, shopping centers, schools, and so on.
 
■
“Hometown Visits” to festivals, community events, shopping centers, campuses and 
other places across the region


===PAGE 298===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
273
 
■
A speaker’s bureau where representatives of the project would speak to organizations
 
■
Email updates and posts on Twitter and Facebook
 
■
Virtual opportunities to “imagine” Central Arkansas:

{
What do you love about Central Arkansas? Identify and vote for Treasured Places.

{
Have a killer idea? Share it and vote for others on IdeaScale.

{
Th ink you know Central Arkansas? Take our interactive quiz at Know Your Region.

{
Want to learn more about Imagine Central Arkansas?
 
■
A web-based platform/game where individuals could select their top fi ve priorities 
for the future by dragging icons depicting priorities such as faster commute, no tax 
increase, more transportation options, parks and natural areas, convenience (shopping, 
services, work nearby), and protecting the environment into empty slots on the page. 
Th en they were asked several more questions about specifi c options or decisions by the 
decision-makers as a graphic on the page showed how each decision or set of decisions 
impacted the individual’s priorities
 
■
Crowdsourcing with online and mobile idea generation tools including IdeaScale and 
MindMixer;34 see Figure 11.4
FIGURE 11.4 Imagine Central Arkansas homepage.
Source: From Metroplan. Imagine Central Arkansas Plan Smart. Live Smart.


===PAGE 299===
274 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Being innovative and using new technologies when conducting a community health assess-
ment require special expertise and rigor. For example, if a needs assessment team plans to use 
GISs to evaluate the accessibility and availability of foods in a geographic area, there must be 
someone who knows how to access the data and use the related soft ware.20 Or, if a team pro-
posed using the community-based participatory action research method, photovoice, to obtain 
the perspective of a marginalized group of people in the community, it is necessary to secure 
expertise on this assessment method to ensure the method is conducted accurately and the 
results are valid.
CONCLUSION
Community health assessment is of interest because assessment is the foundational fi rst step to 
developing successful programs and services that improve health. Th e models described in this 
chapter help guide community assessment and some also include steps in program planning. 
Th ere are key components across models and some diff erences that refl ect diff erent priorities. 
One component that suggests an important skill for the public health nutrition professional and 
carries through assessment, program planning, and implementation is community engagement. 
Community engagement and relationships are essential for a successful community assessment 
and for the success of programs and services that are developed as a result of the assessment. 
Collaboration with other organizations interested in community assessment within the com-
munity can contribute to a more complete assessment, reduce burden (assessment fatigue) on 
the community, and conserve scarce resources. Th e Woodruff  County case described in Case 
Study 1: Woodruff  County, Arkansas, Case Study on Community Assessment is a good example 
of engaging key community members and organizations in the assessment phase who formal-
ized to develop and implement a plan for their community, brought resources, and continued 
to conduct follow-up assessments and planning. Th is case also describes the use of secondary 
and primary data, and tools for assessment of nutrition and physical activity using the MAPP 
tool to guide community assessment. Th is model is also used for program planning and imple-
mentation. Program planning will be discussed in Chapter 12, Public Health Nutrition Program 
Planning.
KEY CONCEPTS
1. 
Community health assessment is an activity facilitated by health professionals and 
includes other stakeholders.
2. 
Community health assessment is the foundational step to planning health programs 
and services.
3. 
Several terms are used to mean community assessment including community health 
needs assessment, environmental scan, and community-based needs assessment.
4. 
In simple terms, when conducting a community assessment, one studies information 
about a community in order to identify strengths, opportunities, needs, wants, and 
concerns related to the health of people in the community.
5. 
Th e CDC defi nes community health assessment as “a process of community engage-
ment; collection, analysis, and interpretation of data on health outcomes and health 


===PAGE 300===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
275
correlates/determinants (. . . health determinates); identifi cation of health disparities; 
and identifi cation of resources that can be used to address priority needs”.1
6. 
Many community organizations conduct community assessment, including public 
health agencies, nonprofi t hospitals, clinics, and other nonprofi t organizations.
7. 
Two overarching reasons for conducting community assessment are that it is good 
practice and it may be required.
8. 
Community assessment can be broad in scope to yield top health concerns or narrow 
and prescriptive to identify barriers to and opportunities for a specifi c health issue.
9. 
Th ere are several models and tools to help practitioners conduct a community health 
needs assessment.
10. Special tools and models are needed to conduct a community assessment that is ori-
ented toward needs and opportunities related to nutrition and physical activity.
11. Primary data are collected by practitioners, and an example of primary data is infor-
mation collected via a community opinion survey.
12. Secondary data are collected by someone else, typically a government agency, and 
examples include demographics or population health status data.
13. Th ere are four categories of information to collect in a community-based health needs 
assessment focused on nutrition and physical activity: (a) population data, (b) opin-
ion and perception information, (c) community environment, and (d) public policy 
environment.
14. From population data, one learns about the demographics of the population of interest, 
about the health status of the population as a whole, and about the food and physical 
activity habits of the population.
15. In gathering opinion and perception information, health practitioners learn about the 
viewpoints and perspectives of the community of interest.
16. Assessing the community environment identifi es community assets, barriers, and 
gaps to achieving good health. Th is part of the assessment can identify inequities.
17. Th e public policy environment includes legislation, regulations, and ordinances at the 
local, state, and national levels that impact community health.
18. Th ere are several tools and surveys to assess the community environment and public 
policy environment related to physical activity and food and nutrition.
19. Th e three challenges that almost always come up when conducting a community 
health needs assessment are (a) gathering too much or not enough information, (b) the 
limitations of health indicator data at the local level, and (c) the confl ict between com-
munity opinion/perception fi ndings and objective fi ndings.
20. To overcome the challenge regarding how much information to gather, a practitioner 
needs to use common sense. Collect as much information as possible, given the time 
frame and capacity of the team, and gather some information from each of the four 
categories.
21. One way to overcome the challenge of not having local-level health, nutrition, and 
physical activity data is to use a subcategory of data that is similar and available.


===PAGE 301===
276 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
22. If community assessment fi ndings from objective measures confl ict with fi ndings 
collected via community opinion surveys, a good solution is to increase engagement 
with community members to better understand community perceptions and involve 
community members in developing solutions.
23. A practitioner uses several skills and abilities in the work of conducting a community 
assessment including understanding data, assessing needs and assets, soliciting and 
using community input, and creating opportunities for collaboration among public 
health, healthcare, and other organizations.
24. Collaboration with other organizations to collect and share data, information, 
perspectives, and fi ndings is integral to the work of conducting a community 
assessment.
25. Consider several factors when deciding who should be on the community assessment 
team such as expertise, community assessment topic, community size, requirements, 
and population of focus.
26. Community engagement is a process by which people (typically not health profes-
sionals) from the community of interest give their opinions, set the agenda regarding 
community health concerns, and make decisions about how to create a health promot-
ing community.
27. Th ere are several opportunities for new technologies to be used in the work of con-
ducting a community assessment. For example, online or social media based surveys 
can be used to gather community opinion, online environment surveys/checklists may 
be conducted to assess the physical environment, or social media posts may be used to 
report progress and/or fi ndings.
CASE STUDY 1: WOODRUFF COUNTY, ARKANSAS, CASE 
STUDY ON COMMUNITY ASSESSMENT35–37
Th e catalyst for this community assessment was a funding opportunity, the CDC High Obesity 
Program. Land grant universities were funded to implement evidence-based interventions in 
counties with adult obesity rates greater than 40%. Th e University of Arkansas System Division 
of Agriculture Research and Extension—Cooperative Extension Service obtained the funding. 
Several counties in Arkansas met the criteria of greater than 40% adult obesity rate. In order for 
a county to be selected for intervention, the County Family and Consumer Science Agent was 
required to opt in and express an interest in built environment and food access.
Woodruff  County was selected to participate. Th is county has four municipalities, Cotton 
Plant, Augusta, Patterson, and McCrory. At the fi rst stakeholder meeting, all communities were 
represented and for the purpose of this community plan assessment and strategic action plan, the 
community was defi ned as the entire county. Community Coalition Action Th eory was employed 
to guide the development and sustainability of the coalition and strategic plan. Th e MAPP tool 
was used to guide the community needs and assets assessment.
Th e grant administrator and interventionists were from the State Extension Offi  ce in Little 
Rock. Th ey had a prior relationship with the county extension agent, who was a 30-year resident 
of Woodruff  County. Th e county extension agent knew many of the people in the communities 
who contributed to the success of the project.


===PAGE 302===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
277
Secondary data collection:
 
■
Data from the U.S. Census Bureau was used to describe the sociodemographic profi le 
of the population. As per the 2010 U.S. Census, Woodruff  County had a population of 
7,260. White/Caucasian made up 69.9%, Black or African American 27.5%, American 
Indian and Alaska Native 0.2%, Native Hawaiian and Other Pacifi c Islander 0.1%, Two 
or More Races 1.4%, and Hispanic or Latino 1.2%. Th e number of households recorded 
from 2011 to 2015 was 2,911. Th e median household income (in 2015 dollars) from 
2011 to 2015 was $28,933. Th e poverty rate was 25.8%.
 
■
Arkansas Department of Health County Health Fact Sheets provided county numbers 
and percentages; state percentages and county rank within the state for demograph-
ics (e.g., total population, race, and ethnicity); economic indicators (e.g., income, 
poverty rates among children and all ages, single-parent homes, uninsured, and no 
transportation); injury; health indicators and major health risk factors (e.g., adult and 
youth smoking rates, low birth weight babies, life expectancy, natural teeth, water 
fl uoridation, infant mortality and teen births, food insecurity, physical inactivity, 
obesity and overweight for adults and youth, low literacy, and youth substance abuse); 
and Department of Health services/programs, such as WIC, and participation rates. 
Woodruff  County ranks 71st of 75 counties in life expectancy, with an average life 
expectancy of 72.6 years. Th e obesity rates in Woodruff  County were 41.1% for adults 
and 30.8% for children. Food insecurity in Woodruff  County was 24.1%. Physical inac-
tivity in Woodruff  County was 30.9%.
 
■
Th e Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s County Health Rankings were used to 
compare relevant indicators with other similar counties, the State of Arkansas, and 
the United States. Th e County Health Rankings were used to obtain state-level data 
such as the “food environment index” (U.S. Department of Agriculture [USDA] Food 
Environment Atlas, Feeding America Map the Meal Gap), “access to exercise opportu-
nities” (Business Analyst, Delorme Map Data, ESRI, and U.S. Census Files), and long 
commutes (American Community Survey).
 
■
Th e Healthy Food Access Portal, USDA Food Desert Map, and Feeding America data 
were used to help describe access to foods and food insecurity in the county.
 
■
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) data obtained from the Arkansas 
Department of Health provided county estimates for hypertension, diabetes, and over-
weight/obesity rates.
Primary data collection:
 
■
A focus group was conducted by trained staff  including a moderator and assistant 
moderator who kept notes. Th e sessions were also digitally audiorecorded. A moder-
ator guide that included semistructured questions was used. Th e location was deter-
mined by the local county extension agent with input from community members. A 
large cross section of people were invited including elected county and city offi  cials, 
faith-based leadership, business owners, civic organization leaders, community 
volunteers, school personnel, and library staff . Th e focus group revealed a perception 
of lower quality produce in local grocery stores. Th e focus group also revealed that 
those who were able drove 20 minutes from the cities in Woodruff  County to shop 
for food in neighboring counties because of better selection, price, and quality. Many 
residents have no or very limited transportation to get to the grocery store. Major 
challenges identifi ed were transportation, distance to grocery stores, and fi nancial 
constraints (food insecurity). Cotton Plant had no grocery stores but did have a food 


===PAGE 303===
278 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
pantry. Th e times and day of the week of operation limited participation. Standard 
methods of qualitative analysis were used to examine the focus group data. A panel 
of experts and community members provided feedback for selected data collection 
tools, instruments, surveys, and focus group questions. Th e panel assisted with 
interpretation and validation of qualitative data coding (i.e., grounded theory) and 
qualitative analyses.
 
■
In order to obtain data more specifi c to the county and food access, the Nutrition 
Environment Measures Survey in Stores (NEMS-S) was completed in Woodruff  
County by an intern housed in Pulaski County. Th e same survey was completed in 
Pulaski County, which identifi ed disparity in access to grocery stores between the 
two counties. Th ere was a small disparity in variety, a large disparity in price, and no 
disparity in quality of foods according to the NEMS-S.
 
■
Two physical activity assessments were conducted by the intern: the PARA and two of 
three parts of the Rural Active Living Assessment (RALA). Th e walkability assessment 
portion was deferred until it could be conducted with community members. Th e time 
and resources of the community were initially directed to the nutrition objectives.
During the fi rst stakeholder meeting, the quantitative and qualitative data were presented in 
a variety of ways. For example, one way the focus group discussion was presented was in a word 
cloud.
Th e major stakeholders were the county and local governments, mayors, schools, church 
pastors, ARcare (Federally Qualifi ed Health Centers [FQHCs]), State and County Extension 
Service, and community volunteers including a very active retired couple. A wide variety of 
people were involved from the beginning. It was important that the right person ask specifi c 
individuals to participate in order to ensure participation of appropriate and representative 
stakeholders.
Th e group formed the Woodruff  County Health Improvement Coalition. Th e emphasis of 
the coalition turned to access to healthy foods as the need for emergency food distribution in 
McCrory was identifi ed by the group. Community members willing to walk 3 miles for food assis-
tance and other results of the focus groups and the NEMS-S confi rmed the need for food access.
A facilitated planning process was conducted. See Case Study 2: McCrory Local Foods, Local 
Places Assessment.
CASE STUDY 2: MCCRORY LOCAL FOODS, LOCAL PLACES 
ASSESSMENT
Th e city of McCrory obtained a Local Foods, Local Places grant funded through the USDA, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the CDC, and the Delta Regional Authority. A second 
community assessment was conducted in the city of McCrory that built on the Woodruff  County 
assessment.
 
■
Th e Environmental Protection Agency’s EJSCREEN: Environmental Justice Screening 
and Mapping Tool (www.epa.gov/ejscreen) provides demographic and environmental 
data. Th e reports from EJSCREEN were generated on the city and the county. A second 
set of reports from the Healthy Food Access Portal, Research Your Community web 
portal (www.healthyfoodaccess.org/access-101/research-your-community) provided 
demographic, workforce, food environment, and health indicator data for the city and 
county.


===PAGE 304===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
279
 
■
Th e fi nal report was generated from the Ag Census, which only includes data at the 
county level.
 
■
Th rough focus groups, the coalition identifi ed additional projects.
Lauren Morris36 provided these important takeaways:
1. 
Went in with grand plans from what had been seen in other places. Let plans/ideas be 
generated from community—good to share ideas from others, but don’t want them to 
adopt something just because someone else did.
2. 
It is sometimes important who asked specifi c people to participate in the process.
3. 
Eating healthy and physical activity is personal and not something most want to talk 
about and must be tied to another priority more important to the stakeholders.
4. 
Don’t push too fast. Plan is a living document. Th e Coalition would not have had the 
Warehouse but would have probably only had the community gardens if the organizers 
had pushed the community too fast. Th e Coalition needed an early win.
5. 
Make sure to ask what they love about their community, what makes it unique, special, 
a place you want to live.
6. 
Th e process helps to create a pathway and hope.
Case Study Questions
1. What were some of the factors motivating this rural community to conduct an 
assessment?
2. 
What community assessment model was used?
3. 
What tools were used to assess the community environment?
4. 
What category of information was collected by community assessment team members?
5. 
Who were the stakeholders involved in the community assessment?
6. 
How were community members engaged?
7. 
What were some of the key learnings/fi ndings?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
An essay: Answer the following questions. Consider the Woodruff  County case study 
and our class discussions about the community assessment models and methods.
 
■
How was community defi ned?
 
■
What was the impetus for the assessment?
 
■
Where might they have obtained data for the assessment?
 
■
Write three of the goals/objectives as specifi c, measurable, achievable, realistic, 
and, timely (SMART) objectives.
2. 
Team assignment: Teams will consist of three to four students per team randomly 
grouped by the instructor. May be assigned community member roles.
 
■
Group work during class:

{
Determine your target population and your target problem.


===PAGE 305===
280 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation

{
Determine how/who will fi nd demographic and background information 
about your target population. Arrange a deadline to have this information to 
the group.

{
Exchange phone numbers and discuss possible group meeting times.

{
Review and make sure you all understand the overall assignment.

{
Divide up workload and assign responsibilities.
 
■
Written plan: Plan should be double-spaced, typed, and without grammatical 
errors. All components listed in the following must be included and written in 
correct format. Th e following components must be included:

{
Title of program

{
Names of team members

{
Mini “Community Assessment”
 
Description of the community and/or demographic profi le
 
Perceived needs and assets (results from the opinion survey and/or 
other sources). One important part of the assessment involves surveying 
the perceived needs of community members. As a group, decide what 
segment of the population you might like to target for your assessment. 
Each student should survey at least fi ve members of your targeted 
community.
 
Health and/or nutrition status of the target population
 
Available resources (assets)

{
Write a needs statement

{
Write one or two goals

{
Write two objectives per goal
3. 
Oral presentation:
 
■
Presentation: 5 to 10 minutes.
 
■
It is the team’s choice as to whether or not all group members should be present; 
however, all team members must come to the front of the classroom.
 
■
Audiovisual aids are recommended but not required.
 
■
Th e presentation should involve a broad overview of the goals and implementa-
tion plan.
 
■
Any necessary audiovisual equipment should be prearranged with the instructor.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What is the simple defi nition of community assessment and the basic components of 
the task?
2. 
What are the complexities of conducting a community assessment?
3. 
What are the most common models and tools used to conduct a community assess-
ment among public health agencies, nonprofi t hospitals, and other community-based 
nonprofi t organizations?


===PAGE 306===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
281
4. 
When conducting a community health assessment with an orientation toward nutri-
tion and physical activity, what are the categories of information to collect and analyze 
and what kind of information is learned in each category?
5. 
Why is collaboration among stakeholders important when conducting a community 
assessment?
6. 
What is community engagement and how is it diff erent from collaboration?
7. 
What are the considerations to using social media and innovative technologies when 
conducting a community assessment?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
 
■
Moving to the future is an online tool for guiding nutrition assessment. https://
movingtothefuture.org/chapter-1-community-assessment/
 
■
Th ere are two free online courses off ered related to the BEAT Institute (http://www
.med.upenn.edu/beat/online-courses.html):

{
Assessing the Built Environment for Physical Activity

{
Assessing the Nutrition Environment
 
■
Th e Built Environment Assessment Tool is located at https://www.cdc.gov/
nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/built-environment-assessment/index.htm
 
■
CDC’s Center for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial Support Public Health 
Professionals Gateway at https://www.cdc.gov/stltpublichealth provides tools, infor-
mation, and resources related to health department accreditation, community health 
assessment and planning, national health initiatives, strategies and action plans, 
funding opportunities, training, and other resources. Community Health Assessment 
& Health Improvement Planning resources are available at https://www.cdc.gov/
stltpublichealth/cha
GLOSSARY
Community-based participatory research (CBPR): A process for conducting research that 
involves partnership between community members and researchers in which the community 
is valued and involved in every phase of the project.
Community engagement: A process whereby people (typically not health professionals) from 
the community of interest give their opinions, set the agenda regarding community health con-
cerns, and make decisions about how to create a health promoting community.
Community health assessment (CHA) and community health needs assessment 
(CHNA): Defi ned broadly as “a process of community engagement; collection, analysis, and 
interpretation of data on health outcomes and health correlates/determinants (. . . health 
determinates); identifi cation of health disparities; and identifi cation of resources that can 
be used to address priority needs.”1 
Crowdsourcing: A process for obtaining ideas, input, and sometimes services, goods or fund-
ing from a large group of people, oft en through technology.


===PAGE 307===
282 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Focus group: A guided, small-group interview that uses group interaction to elicit information 
from group members.
Food environment: Includes the physical, social, and person-centered environments that all 
play a role in what people choose to eat.
Photovoice: A community opinion data collection method whereby community members take 
photographs of various aspects of their community and tell stories about the photographs. 
Examples could include foods available in vending machines, grocery or corner stores, or cafe-
terias, or other aspects of the environment such as walkability of an area.
Primary data: Data collected by the practitioners involved in the community health needs 
assessment process.
Secondary data: Data collected by someone else, typically with a government agency such as 
the U.S. Census Bureau or a state health department.
REFERENCES
1. U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Health Assessment for Population Health 
Improvement: Resource of Most Frequently Recommended Health Outcomes and Determinants. Atlanta, GA: 
Offi  ce of Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services; 2013. https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.cste
.org/resource/resmgr/CrossCuttingI/FinalCHAforPHI508.pdf
2. Public Health Accreditation Board. Acronyms and Glossary of Terms. Version 1.0. http://www.phaboard
.org/wp-content/uploads/PHAB-Acronyms-and-Glossary-of-Terms-Version-1.02.pdf. Published 
September 2011.
3. Wilburn A, Vanderpool RC, Knight JR. Environmental scanning as a public health tool: Kentucky’s 
human papillomavirus vaccination project 160165. Prev Chronic Dis. 2016;13:E109. doi:10.5888/
pcd13.160165
4. Probert KL. Moving to the Future: Conduct a Community Assessment—Chapter Overview. https://
movingtothefuture.org/chapter-1-community-assessment/
5. Barnett K. Best Practices for Community Health Needs Assessment and Implementation Strategy 
Development: A Review of Scientifi c Methods, Current Practices, and Future Potential Report Proceedings 
from a Public Health Forum and Interview of Experts. Oakland, CA: Public Health Institute; 2012. http://
www.phi.org/uploads/application/fi les/dz9vh55o3bb2x56lcrzyel83fwfu3mvu24oqqvn5z6qaeiw2u4.pdf
6. Th e Network for Public Health Law. Issue Brief: New Requirements for Nonprofi t Hospitals Provide 
Opportunities for Health Department Collaboration. 2011. http://www.networkforphl.org/_asset/
fqmqxr/CHNAFINAL.pdf
7. Public Health Accreditation Board. Public Health Accreditation Board Acronyms and Glossary of Terms 
Version 1.0. Alexandria, VA: Public Health Accreditation Board; 2012. http://www.phaboard.org/
wp-content/uploads/PHAB-Acronyms-and-Glossary-of-Terms-Version-1.02.pdf
8. Health Resources and Services Administration. Title V Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant 
to States Program: Guidance and Forms for the Title V Application/Annual Report. (Application Guidance 
No. OMB # 0915-0172.) Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2019:17–18. 
https://mchb.tvisdata.hrsa.gov/uploadedfi les/Documents/blockgrantguidance.pdf
9. National Organization of State Offi  ces of Rural Health. Community-Based Health Needs Assessment 
Activities: Opportunities for Collaboration Between Public Health Departments and Rural Hospitals. (Issue 
Brief). Arlington, VA: Association of State Health Offi  cers; 2017. http://www.astho.org/uploadedFiles/
Programs/Access/Primary_Care/Scan%20of%20Community-Based%20Health%20Needs%20
Assessment%20Activities.pdf
10. National Association of County and City Health Offi  cials. MAPP User’s Handbook: Health Equity 
Supplement 2014. 2014. http://eweb.naccho.org/eweb/DynamicPage.aspx?WebCode=proddetailadd&ivd_
qty=1&ivd_prc_prd_key=044bc66e-8d1f-4c1d-a85d-33976a21a6a6&Action=Add&site=naccho&
ObjectKeyFrom=1A83491A-9853-4C87-86A4-F7D95601C2E2&DoNotSave=yes&ParentObject=
CentralizedOrderEntry&ParentDataObject=Invoice%20Detail


===PAGE 308===
 
11. Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition 
283
11. National Association of County and City Health Offi  cials. Mobilizing for Action Th rough Planning and 
Partnerships (MAPP). https://www.naccho.org/programs/public-health-infrastructure/performance
-improvement/community-health-assessment/mapp/phase-1-organize-for-success-partnership
-development
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation 
(CHANGE) Action Guide: Building a Foundation of Knowledge to Prioritize Community Needs. 2019. 
https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change-tool/index.html
13. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation 
(CHANGE) Tool Action Steps. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change
-tool/action-steps.html
14. Association for Community Health Improvement. Community Health Assessment Toolkit. 2017. https://
www.healthycommunities.org/assesstoolkit
15. University of Kansas Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Table of 
Contents. 2018. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents
16. Probert KL. Moving to the Future: Tools for Planning Nutrition and Physical Activity Programs. http://
movingtothefuture.org
17. Splett P, Probert KL. Assessment Terms for Community Nutrition Needs Assessment. Unpublished 
manuscript; 2019.
18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Chronic Disease iIdicators. 2015. https://www.cdc.gov/cdi
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Built Environment Assessment Tool Manual. 2019. https://
www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/built-environment-assessment/index.htm
20. Lytle L, Myers A. Measures Registry User Guide: Food Environment. Washington, DC: National 
Collaborative on Childhood Obesity Research; 2017. http://www.nccor.org/downloads/NCCOR_MR_
User_Guide-Food_Environment-FINAL.pdf
21. Glanz K. Nutrition Environment Measures Survey. https://www.med.upenn.edu/nems
22. Probert KL. Moving to the Future, Conduct a Community Assessment. “No Data Tip Sheet.” https://
movingtothefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/No_Data_Tip_Sheet.pdf
23. Florian J, Roy NM, Quintiliani LM, et al. Using photovoice and asset mapping to inform a community-
based diabetes intervention, Boston, Massachusetts, 2015. Prev Chronic Dis. 2016;13:E107. doi:10.5888/
pcd13.160160
24. Ko LK, Enzler C, Rodriguez E, et al. Food availability and food access in rural agricultural communities: 
use of mixed methods. BMC Public Health. 2018;18(1):634. doi:10.1186/s12889-018-5547-x
25. University of Kansas Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 3 
Developing a Plan for Assessing Local Needs and Resources. 2018. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/
assessment/assessing-community-needs-and-resources/develop-a-plan/main
26. Council on Linkages Between Academia and Public Health Practice. Core Competencies for Public Health 
Professionals. http://www.phf.org/programs/corecompetencies/Pages/Core_Competencies_Domains.aspx
27. Rosenbaum S. Principles to Consider for the Implementation of a Community Health Needs Assessment 
Process. Washington, DC: George Washington University School of Public Health and Health 
Services, Department of Health Policy; 2013. http://nnphi.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/
PrinciplesToConsiderForTh eImplementationOfACHNAProcess_GWU_20130604.pdf
28. DeSalvo KB, Wang YC, Harris A, et al. Public health 3.0: a call to action for public health to meet the 
challenges of the 21st century. Prev Chronic Dis. 2017;14:E78. doi:10.5888/pcd14.170017
29. Akintobi TH, Lockamy E, Goodin L, et al. Processes and outcomes of a community-based participatory 
research-driven health needs assessment: a tool for moving health disparity reporting to evidence-based 
action. Prog Community Health Partnersh. 2018;12(1S):139–147. doi:10.1353/cpr.2018.0029
30. Kirk CM, Johnson-Hakim S, Anglin A, Connelly C. Putting the community back into community 
health needs assessments: maximizing Partnerships via community-based participatory research. Prog 
Community Health Partnersh. 2017;11(2):167–173. doi:10.1353/cpr.2017.0021
31. Williams KJ, Bray PG, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, et al. Modeling the principles of community-based 
participatory research in a community health assessment conducted by a health foundation. Health 
Promot Pract. 2016;10(1):67–75. doi:10.1177/1524839906294419
32. O’Mara-Eves A, Brunton G, Oliver S, et al. Th e eff ectiveness of community engagement in public health 
interventions for disadvantaged groups: a meta-analysis. BMC Public Health. 2015;15:159. doi:10.1186/
s12889-015-1352-y


===PAGE 309===
284 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
33. King AC, Glanz K, Patrick K. Technologies to measure and modify physical activity and eating 
environments. Am J Prev Med. 2015;48(5):630–638. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2014.10.005
34. Metroplan. Imagine Central Arkansas plan smart live smart.
35. Bullington LA. In: Adams BA, ed. Personal communication between Leigh Ann Bullington and Becky 
Adams on September 18 and October 19 2018 regarding the Woodruff  County community assessment and 
planning process. 2018.
36. Morris L. In: Adams BA, ed. Personal communication between Lauren Morris and Becky Adams on 
August 30, 2018 regarding the Woodruff  County community assessment and planning process. 2018.
37. Washburn L, Freasier L, Morris L, Conner J. Collaborations to activate local communities [PowerPoint]. 
(No. 1). Association of State Public Health Nutritionists; 2017. https://asphn.org/cdc-dnpao-conference
-call-november-9-2017-collaborations-activate-local-communities


===PAGE 310===
12
PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION 
PROGRAM PLANNING
KAREN L. PROBERT AND BECKY ADAMS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the steps to program planning.
• Tell why it is important to review community assessment results as the fi rst step to devel-
oping a program plan.
• Understand the diff erence between health goals and objectives.
• Describe the criteria for SMART objectives.
• Understand the diff erence between evidence-based programs and practice-based  evidence.
• Understand levels of evidence of public health programs.
• Describe how to fi nd evidence-informed programs.
• Tell why selecting and implementing programs are described as a science and an art.
• List the common components to a program plan.
• List three other plans that accompany a program plan.
• Describe the diff erent types of community resources and collaborations.
• Describe the diff erence between a centralized and decentralized model of managing im-
plementation of the plan.
INTRODUCTION
Th e previous chapter covered the process of conducting a community health assessment. Th e 
natural next step following assessment is to develop programs and services to improve the health 
of people in the community. Th is chapter includes a description of the steps to program planning 
and reviews essential elements to developing a successful public health nutrition program plan. 
In this chapter, the words “program” or “intervention” are used broadly and could encompass any 
group of activities including projects, services, programs, and policy, system, or environmental 
changes.


===PAGE 311===
286 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
FUNDAMENTALS OF PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION PROGRAM DESIGN, 
PLANNING, AND MANAGEMENT
Program planning is like vacation planning. Th e decision to go on vacation is based on some kind 
of assessment that includes a list of needs and wants from a vacation. Th e fi rst big decision in vaca-
tion planning is setting the destination and defi ning some key parameters of the vacation (mode 
of transportation, length of time away, and approximate amount of money to spend). Next, the 
details are fi gured out such as a place to stay, things to do, planning for meals, and deciding what 
to pack. And many of these decisions are based on research including reviews, recommendations, 
reports, etc. Th en you go on vacation! And while on vacation, you are monitoring your experi-
ences and making tweaks to the plan to optimize the vacation. Public health nutrition program 
planning is a similar process. Based on fi ndings from the community health needs assessment, 
a community health goal, or destination, is set (e.g., healthy weight among families with chil-
dren); in addition, some key factors are defi ned that provide guidance to achieving the health goal 
(e.g., increase healthy eating and active living habits among families with children). Next, based 
on available evidence, the specifi c project ideas are selected (e.g., worksite programs to improve 
diet and physical activity, healthy corner stores, and safe routes to schools). Details about how 
to implement the projects are written down in an action plan. Th en the work on these projects 
begins! Th roughout implementation of the projects, people are assessing how things are going 
and deciding what modifi cations to make to ensure success and improve health. Again, public 
health nutrition program planning is a process and is similar to planning other signifi cant events.
Th is chapter reviews seven program planning steps starting with listing community assess-
ment fi ndings and ending with implementing the intervention and monitoring for eff ectiveness. 
If public health practitioners want to create a successful intervention, all steps are important and 
the order of the steps is important. For example, it is tempting to decide the public health nutri-
tion intervention, or program, before the goals and outcome objectives have been determined, 
but using the vacation-planning analogy, this is equivalent to packing a down parka and snow 
shoes before the family ultimately decides to vacation in the Bahamas.
REVIEW OF COMMUNITY ASSESSMENT RESULTS
Obviously, reviewing community assessment results is not a diffi  cult step, but it can only be 
done if a community health needs assessment has been conducted. Th is step is essential to plan-
ning programs that improve health because it reminds practitioners to plan programs based on 
the needs and wants of a community, which are learned from conducting a community health 
assessment. Key public health documents plus all of the community assessment tools reviewed 
in Chapter 11, Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition, direct a public health prac-
titioner to list, identify, review, and/or report primary health issues based on community health 
assessment fi ndings.
For this step of reviewing community assessment results, a practitioner compiles all the com-
munity health concerns and community assets identifi ed from analyzing the four categories of 
data identifi ed in Chapter 11, Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition: population 
data, opinion and perception information, community environment, and public policy envi-
ronment. It is tempting to compile the list of fi ndings based on one’s own opinions or beliefs, but 
at this point, it is best to simply list all fi ndings. Reviewing the list of fi ndings is then used in the 
next step of defi ning goals and objectives.


===PAGE 312===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
287
Along with listing or reviewing community health needs assessment results, some resources 
emphasize the task of creating a community assessment report.1,2 By writing an assessment report, 
details of the community needs assessment work are not lost, and all the information from the 
assessment process is located in one place, making it easy to pull facts as needed to fulfi ll requests 
for information from the community health needs assessment process. For example, information 
from the report can be used to create social media postings that keep community members and 
partners informed of the work, or the information can be used in a grant application to secure 
funding for next steps. Although the specifi c categories of information to include vary among 
resources, in general, the community health assessment report includes a community profi le or a 
description of the community served and assessed, a listing of community assessment team mem-
bers involved in the assessment, a description of the process and methods used to conducting the 
community health needs assessment, fi ndings, and next steps.1,2
Defi ne Program Goals and Objectives With Community Stakeholders
Aft er generating and reviewing a list of health concerns based on the community assessment, the 
next step is to focus the team’s eff orts. Th is is accomplished by determining priorities, and writing 
goals and objectives related to the priorities. Th e other value to defi ning goals and objectives is 
realized later aft er implementing the program when practitioners are monitoring progress and 
evaluating whether the program made a diff erence in the community.
Th e assumption here is that defi ning goals and objectives is done with others from a team or 
coalition. As noted in Chapter 11, Community Assessments in Public Health Nutrition, collab-
oration is fundamental to community assessment and it is essential to program planning.3,4 It 
would be impossible to do this work alone, and without stakeholders involved, the program will 
fail. With input on goals and objectives from people living in the community and from stake-
holders, there is built-in support for the eff orts to improve health, increasing the likelihood of 
success.
If the community needs assessment was broad in scope, there may be a long list of issues or 
concerns that the community could address. It is best to prioritize by choosing one or two health 
issues to focus on. Th ere are materials and techniques available to facilitate a committee’s eff ort 
to identify priorities. Among them are resources from the University of Kansas5 and the National 
Association of County and City Health Offi  cials.6
If the community health needs assessment was specifi cally assessing needs related to nutrition 
and physical activity, the coalition may already have a priority health issue, such as “child and 
adolescent healthy weight,” or “food security,” or “heart disease prevention,” or some other nutri-
tion-related priority. If so, this step of prioritizing is not necessary now.
Once one or two health priorities are set, the program planning team can write health goals 
and objectives. Begin by writing a health goal. Th ere is no single, standard defi nition of health 
goal, and agencies and organizations defi ne it diff erently. Considering the many ways that health 
goal is defi ned, a general description for health goal is a statement about a long-term desired state 
of health, clarifying what you want to achieve. Goals are oft en positive statements, such as every-
one has healthy food to eat, promote daily physical activity, and promote healthy weight, rather 
than reduce hunger, decrease inactivity, or prevent cancer, respectively. Specifi c measurements 
and time frames are not generally included in goals, and goals are broad-based. A community 
health goal is derived from a health priority or health concern.7 For example, if obesity is identi-
fi ed as a top community health concern, then “Promote healthy weight in the community” could 
be the health goal. A simple worksheet like the one provided in Exhibit 12.1 helps practitioners 


===PAGE 313===
288 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
write community health goals connected to top health concerns of the community. As noted in 
the worksheet, it may also be helpful to record existing health goals in the community or at the 
state and national levels. Knowing this information can give guidance on wording and/or help the 
community connect to larger eff orts.
Specifi c ways of achieving the goal belong in the objectives, strategies, and action steps. Once 
the team has fi nalized its health goal, then it is time to write objectives. Objectives are the pathways 
to achieving a goal. An objective is a specifi c, measurable, intended result of your committee’s 
work.8 Objectives need to relate logically to a goal, and they should include specifi c measurements 
and time frames. Most resources identify two or three levels of objectives. Th e diff erent levels or 
types consider (a) length of time to achieve and (b) whether the end point has to do with setting 
up and implementing the program or has to do with changing behaviors or health status. Th e ter-
minology for and categorization of objectives varies. For example, an objective having to do with 
the proportion of adolescents eating the recommended intake of fruits and vegetables could be 
defi ned as an outcome objective, intermediate objective, or health behavior objective, depending 
on the resource. Or, an objective directing the establishment of a school employee wellness pro-
gram might be considered a process objective, a policy objective, or even a strategy for an objective 
EXHIBIT 12.1
MOVING TO THE FUTURE: WRITING GOALS WORKSHEET
Priority health problem
(top health concern)
Writing goals
Worksheet
What local health goals
are similar to your goal?
What is the desired health status if this problem
is addressed?
What state health goals
are similar to your goal?
What national health goals are similar to your goal?
GOAL (rephrase the idea in the above
box making it a broad-based, positive
statement):
Source: From Probert KL. Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning, Chapter 2: Identify 
Priorities, Goals and Objectives, Section: Writing Goals – Overview. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public Health 
Nutritionists; 2006. https://movingtothefuture.org/chapter-2-determine-goals/writing-goals-overview


===PAGE 314===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
289
focused on improving the school health environment, depending on the resource. Th e exact term 
for an objective is not important. It is important that goals, objectives, and strategies are logically 
related and that objectives are well written. A logical relationship among goals, objectives, and 
strategies helps make sure that your work will impact what you are striving to achieve.
Aft er writing a health goal, the types of objectives to defi ne are generally called outcome or 
intermediate, or behavioral and/or community-level. Again, the objective name is dependent on 
the resource used as a guide. Th is text will use “outcome” to describe this type or level of objec-
tive. Generally, it will take a community at least 3 years to achieve outcome objectives. Here are 
examples of two outcome objectives:
 
■
Over the next 3 years and by December 31, 20xx, convert downtown [City Name] to a 
pedestrian-friendly design that complies with the state Department of Transportation’s 
Pedestrian and Streetscape Design Guidelines.
 
■
In 5 years by June 30, 20xx, increase from 30% to 35% the percentage of people in 
[County Name] who have a healthy weight. (Baseline data source: 20xx Behavioral 
Risk Factor Surveillance System [BRFSS] data with data from [County Name] and 10 
peer counties. Th e state chronic disease epidemiologist generated this regional data. 
Goal source: the upper 95% CI from this same regional data.)
Exhibit 12.2 presents another worksheet that can help public health nutrition practitioners write 
objectives that are related to the health goal.
Healthy People is a national eff ort that sets goals and objectives to improve the health and 
well-being of all people in the United States. Th e Healthy People Initiative has been going since 
1979 with a Healthy People report issued every decade (1990, 2000, 2010, 2020, and 2030).9 Th e 
goals and objectives are evidence-based and have input from several federal agencies, public 
health experts, and the public. Healthy People addresses those aspects of health that are the most 
critical to overall health and well-being. One of the greatest benefi ts of Healthy People objectives 
is that any community health team can adopt the goals and objectives, and they can be used as 
is or altered to meet a community’s needs. It is smart to take advantage of the expertise required 
to set these health goals and objectives, and use Healthy People goals and objectives to guide the 
writing of community health goals and objectives.
Most resources use the term “process objectives” for the type of objectives having to do with 
setting up and implementing a program. Th e length of time to achieve a process objective is short, 
usually about a year. Process objectives are more relevant later when discussing the program plan.
Th e last point about objectives is that they must be SMART. A SMART objective is one that 
meets these criteria:
 
■
Specifi c: It tells how much of what is to be achieved or who will change and by how 
much.
 
■
Measurable: Th e information can be collected, detected, or obtained.
 
■
Achievable: Th e intended result is realistic.
 
■
Relevant: Th e result fi ts with the mission of the group.
 
■
Time bound: A timeline is included.8
EVIDENCE-BASED PROGRAMS IN PROGRAM PLANNING
With direction provided by the health goal and outcome objectives, the next move is to decide 
what programs to pursue. Th e choice cannot be random or based on a practitioner’s preference; 


===PAGE 315===
290 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
instead, the programs selected need evidence of a positive eff ect on the defi ned health goal and/
or outcome objectives. For example, if “achieving healthy weight among working-age adults” is 
the health goal, then one evidence-based program to consider would be worksite nutrition and 
physical activity program(s) that have strong evidence of eff ectiveness for reducing weight among 
employees.10 Another option to consider would be to increase healthy options in vending machines 
at work places.11 Th ere are many program ideas that community members and stakeholders will 
want to do, but the program will not have evidence of eff ectiveness. Continuing with the example 
above, some community members may have lost weight recently by following the ketogenic diet 
and want to do a program that includes this diet. Teaching people how to follow the ketogenic 
diet, however, does not have evidence that it is an eff ective community-based intervention in obe-
sity prevention and control; hence ketogenic diet classes should not be considered as a program to 
EXHIBIT 12.2
MOVING TO THE FUTURE: WRITING OBJECTIVES OUTCOMES WORKSHEET
Writing objectives
outcomes worksheet
What health status improvements
do you expect if you achieve your goal?
A.
GOAL:
What health behaviors need to be
Reproduce this sheet as needed.
present in order to achieve the goal?
B.
What changes or improvements in the
environment should be made in order to
achieve the goal?
C.
What policies should be in place
in order to achieve the goal?
D.
Health behavior objective(s):
Health policy objective(s):
Health environment objective(s):
Health status objective(s):
Source: From Probert KL. Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning, Chapter 2: Identify 
Priorities, Goals and Objectives, Section: Writing Objectives. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public Health Nutrition-
ists; 2006. https://movingtothefuture.org/chapter-2-determine-goals/writing-objectives-overview


===PAGE 316===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
291
improve public health. Th ere are many community-based programs with evidence that supports 
nutrition-related health goals and many program ideas without evidence of eff ectiveness. Public 
health nutritionists who understand, advocate for, and implement evidence-based programs will 
help improve the health of the community they serve. Th is chapter reviews history and clarifi es 
terminology related to evidence-based programs, reviews defi nitions for programs with varying 
levels of evidence, and addresses the concern of using evidence-based programs.
TERMINOLOGY
Public health practitioners, managers, and leaders use the term “evidence-based” frequently and 
perhaps without knowing the intricacies of the term. Put simply, “evidence-based” means that 
you use evidence to decide what to do. Regarding evidence-based programs, this simple meaning 
gets complicated because (a) evidence has varying levels of strength or proof, (b) community 
stakeholders have varying levels of trust in the diff erent types of evidence, (c) there are always 
other community factors not accounted for in the evidence that aff ect the program outcomes in 
actual communities, and (d) not all possible solutions to health concerns have been researched or 
evaluated so the science does not always exist to say whether an idea will work or not.
Adding more complexity to the adjective “evidence-based” is the fact that it is used to describe 
the practice of public health, that is, evidence-based public health, and the term is used in a 
general way to identify preferred public health programs, that is, evidence-based programs or 
evidence-based interventions. Plus, “evidence-based” is a specifi c category of interventions in 
the classifi cation of interventions by level of evidence. Because of this specifi c meaning for “evi-
dence-based,” the adjective “evidence-informed” has emerged as a descriptor of programs that 
are based on some level of evidence that will have a positive eff ect on health. Th is chapter uses 
“evidence-informed” as a general description of programs that have some level of evidence of 
eff ectiveness and uses “evidence-based” when the specifi c, narrow meaning is intended.
HISTORY AND EVOLUTION OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Th e notion of evidence-based or evidence-informed programs has not always been part of public 
health programming. Before the evidence-based public health (EBPH) movement that started 
in the late 1990s,12 public health practitioners oft en selected programs that “sounded good.”13 
Although programs that “sounded good” were the only option and may have occasionally resulted 
in population-wide health improvements, we now know that using evidence-informed programs 
will yield steady improvements in community health and demonstrate responsible use of pro-
gram funding.14
EVIDENCE-BASED PUBLIC HEALTH
Th e concept of EBPH is young and started, formally, in the late 1990s.14 Th e newness of EBPH 
means that there is not a settled-on defi nition for the phrase. Th e defi nition is evolving as more 
research is published and as practitioners use evidence-based programs and report their fi ndings 
and experience.14 Proof that there is not yet agreement on the defi nition of EBPH, provided here 
are three descriptions from reputable sources. An article in the Annual Review of Public Health 
entitled, “Evidence-Based Public Health: A Fundamental Concept for Public Health Practice,” 


===PAGE 317===
292 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
whose authors are leading experts on the topic, listed key characteristics of EBPH, which some 
consider a defi nition:
making decisions using the best available peer-reviewed evidence (both quantitative and 
qualitative research); using data and information systems systematically; applying pro-
gram-planning frameworks (that oft en have a foundation in behavioral science theory); 
engaging the community in assessment and decision making; conducting sound evalua-
tion; and disseminating what is learned to key stakeholders and decision makers.14
Th e Rural Health Information Hub defi nes EBPH as “Development, implementation, and eval-
uation of eff ective programs and policies in public health. It employs scientifi c reasoning to sys-
tematically use data and information systems, and appropriately use behavioral science theory 
and program planning models.”15 In a paper published in 2017, the international public health 
community defi ned EBPH as “a process of integrating evidence from scientifi c research and prac-
tice to improve the health of the target population.”16 Th ere are many other defi nitions circulating 
in published materials. Generally, however, EBPH can be described as a combination of scientifi c 
evidence and values, resources, and context.14
EBPH is not the same as evidence-based programs, but the terms are related. Evidence-based 
programs are a signifi cant component of EBPH, but community assessment is also a component 
of EBPH. At times, the two phrases, EBPH and evidence-based programs, are confl ated. Th eir 
meanings did evolve together with several key events happening at roughly the same time. In the 
early 1990s, evidence-based medicine (EBM) was coined and practitioners were encouraged to 
follow the newest research fi ndings to improve patient health outcomes instead of practitioners 
relying solely on intuition and experience.12 When EBM was introduced, it provided excitement 
and a new focus on how to improve health across many health disciplines. Public health sci-
ence was close behind in identifying approaches to improve population health. EBPH was fi rst 
proposed in 1997.12 Th e connection between EBM and EBPH is strong, and in fact, a simple 
description of EBPH is that it applies the principles of EBM to the fi eld of public health.17 Th e 
next key point on the EBPH timeline was the development of the Healthy People 2020 objec-
tives. Th e Secretary’s Advisory Committee on National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 
Objectives for 2020 was asked to suggest actions for achieving the Healthy People 2020 objectives 
because “just setting the targets” was not adequate.13
Since then, EBPH has experienced substantial attention and growth. Th e collective eff ort of 
many researchers and practitioners to develop a cross-cutting defi nition and methodology of evi-
dence-based practice to guide medicine, nursing, psychology, social work, and public health is a 
sign of the permanence and value of evidence-based work.12 “Evidence-based practice” is the term 
used to describe an approach to how a health professional ought to conduct business in his or her 
discipline. Figure 12.1 is a model of “evidence-based practice” that all health disciplines could use, 
that is, a transdisciplinary model of evidence-based practice. Th e model incorporates the strengths 
of each discipline’s model and tries to address the defi ciency of each independent model.
EVIDENCE-INFORMED PROGRAMS
From here forward in this chapter, the focus is on evidence-informed and evidence-based pro-
grams. According to the strictest defi nition of evidence-based, an evidence-based program follows 
research protocols in design and implementation to determine whether the program made a diff er-
ence. Evidence-based programs are typically highly controlled and well resourced with trained staff  
and adequate funding. Th e fl ip side of this coin is practice-based evidence, which describes when a 


===PAGE 318===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
293
public health program is launched in a community, and the process and results are documented and 
measured; that is, the researcher observes and records what happens when a public health program 
is operating in the real-world environment, which has several imperfections from a research per-
spective. Th e impact of the public health program is then measured and reported out.18
As noted previously, “evidence” has varying levels of strength or proof, which some refer to as 
a continuum of evidence. Fortunately, a typology for classifying interventions or programs was 
developed in 2009 and is mostly used by public health researchers and practitioners. Th e typol-
ogy includes evidence-based interventions, eff ective interventions, promising interventions, and 
emerging interventions.14 
Although some of the category terms may be used interchangeably or imprecisely by practi-
tioners, the typology is well adhered to in publications. Some organizations have written defi ni-
tions for each category based on the typology. For example, the Rural Health Information Hub 
defi nes evidence-based, eff ective, promising, and emerging programs as follows, which is very 
close to the classifi cation described in 2009:
 
■
Evidence-based programs: Published in systematic reviews, syntheses, or meta-anal-
yses whose authors have conducted a structured review of published high-quality, 
peer-reviewed studies and evaluation reports. Evidence-based strategies produce 
signifi cant, positive health or behavioral outcomes and/or intermediate policy, envi-
ronmental, or economic impacts.
 
■
Eff ective programs: Published in high-quality, peer-reviewed studies and have pro-
duced signifi cant positive health or behavioral outcomes, and policy, environment, or 
economic impacts.
 
■
Promising programs: Based on exploratory evaluations that show potentially mean-
ingful health or behavioral outcomes, and policy, environment, or economic impacts. 
Th ey have strong qualitative or quantitative data supporting positive outcomes, but are 
not yet generalizable to public health outcomes.
FIGURE 12.1 Revised evidence-based practice model.
Source: From Satterfield JM, Spring B, Brownson RC, et al. Toward a transdisciplinary model of evidence-based 
practice. Milbank Q. 2009;87(2):368–390. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2009.00561
Environment and
organizational
context
Best available
research
evidence
Resources,
including
practitioner's
expertise
Client’s/population’s
characteristics, state,
needs, values, and
preferences
Decision-making


===PAGE 319===
294 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
 
■
Emerging programs: Based on guidelines, protocols, or standards that may be in the 
process of being evaluated by researchers to measure their positive impact on public 
health. Emerging practices are new and there is not enough information to make a 
decision about eff ectiveness.15
A footnote about these classifi cations of interventions by level of evidence: Th e classifi cation is 
recognized and followed by most public health researchers and most governmental public health 
agencies, but entities that have developed ratings systems for program/intervention databases 
may veer from these specifi c classifi cations and create their own terms and levels. Th e ratings 
classifi cations are, however, based on the typology.
BEST PRACTICE
One new level of evidence has emerged since the typology was proposed, and it is called “best 
practice.” Best practices are rooted in the practice-based evidence idea mentioned earlier. Th ere 
is no consensus on a defi nition nor on the characteristics of best practices. In 2015, a working 
defi nition was proposed: “practices that have shown evidence of eff ectiveness in improving pop-
ulation health when implemented in a specifi c real-life setting and are likely to be replicable in 
other settings.”19 A best practice would be an evidence-informed program. Unfortunately, the 
term “best practice” is overused and misused and, at times, has little meaning. Public health prac-
titioners who understand the term use it correctly and help implement best practices, which will 
help advance this emerging area of evidence-informed programs and improve population health.
VALUE OF EVIDENCE-INFORMED PROGRAMS
Although not stated explicitly so far, it is assumed is that there is value in using evidence-in-
formed public health programs in communities. Th e value can be summarized in two words: cost 
and respect. By implementing evidence-informed public health programs, a practitioner saves 
resources including money, community members’ time, and stakeholder time.20 Th ere is also an 
opportunity cost when an ineff ective program is developed and used in a community. Somewhat 
related, but a value by itself, is the respect shown to stakeholders, funders, and community mem-
bers when public health practitioners develop programs that have evidence of making a diff erence 
and helping achieve the community’s health goals.
CONCERN REGARDING FOCUS ON EVIDENCE
Although there are many clear advantages to using evidence-informed programs to improve 
population health, some public health practitioners are cautious about the heavy emphasis on 
programs with evidence. Th e concern is the potential loss of innovation if “everyone” is only 
using evidence-based programs. It is true that the fi eld would go stale and practitioners would 
feel like they were working with a straitjacket on if only evidence-based programs were used. 
However, this concern is not warranted. Th e typology for classifying interventions by level of 
evidence includes an “emerging” category. An emerging program could easily be innovative as 
long as it is based on some evidence, including word of mouth or personal experience and that 
it will be evaluated. Th e practice-based evidence approach is also applicable here. Hence, even 
with much focus on evidence, innovation is permitted. Th e burden of innovation does, however, 


===PAGE 320===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
295
fall on practitioners who must conduct program evaluation and publish their fi ndings or connect 
with researchers who will publish fi ndings. Finally, philanthropy tends to nurture the innovative 
side of practice, making their role in the fi eld much more critical than simply providing funding 
for interventions.
Identifying Evidence-Informed Programs in Public Health Nutrition
Th is is the step in program planning that many practitioners enjoy the most—fi nding programs to 
implement. Th is step involves (a) making a list of potential programs that have evidence to meet 
the health goal and outcome objectives and (b) narrowing down the options with community 
health team members. Th e information in this section describes how to accomplish these two 
steps.
Because of the focus and attention on evidence-based public health, there are several websites 
to support public health practitioners in fi nding and implementing evidence-informed programs 
that positively aff ect public health. Th e key feature of these websites is a database of evidence-in-
formed programs. At the time this text was published, there were 16 websites that included evi-
dence-informed programs to improve diet and exercise behaviors of communities (see Appendix 
at the end of the book). Most of the 16 websites are domestic ones, with .gov or .org attached to 
their URLs, but two are international websites from the Public Health Agency of Canada and the 
United Kingdom’s National Institute for Health Care Excellence. Most websites have a database 
that dynamically generates a list of programs based on criteria selected. Th e websites include 
information either posted directly on the website and/or program information that is available via 
a link to another website. Th ere are some similarities and several diff erences across these websites. 
Here are some website traits with a general comment on how they vary.
 
■
Each website fi lls a specifi c niche. For example, one website is oriented toward non-
profi t hospital staff , another includes programs and resources for the Title V Maternal 
and Child Health Services Block Grant Program, and another website is oriented 
toward local leaders wanting to create sustainable community change.
 
■
Available programs in each website are only as good as what has been added to the 
database. Most of the websites add programs as evidence is available to justify inclusion 
in the website database. Hence, eff ective programs in practice but without evidence in 
the published literature will not be in many of the website databases.
 
■
Each website is costly to maintain. Some websites lost funding a few years aft er they 
were created. It seems, however, that if fi nancial support is cut, the website developer 
keeps the web-based database available, but no new content is added aft er the funding 
ended.
 
■
Th e programs included in each website database vary in their level of evidence or form 
of evidence. For example, a couple of the websites only include evidence-based pro-
grams while other websites include programs across the continuum of evidence.
 
■
Th e source of the programs in each database and how programs are added vary. Some 
websites include programs submitted by practitioners and others include only pro-
grams selected by experts.
 
■
Most websites have programs and some resources that help implement, but two web-
sites are a list of resources only.
 
■
Most websites with programs have a rating system, and although the rating systems 
vary across websites, rating systems are clearly explained on each site.


===PAGE 321===
296 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
 
■
Each agency and organization with a website uses their own process to identify what is 
evidence-based, but oft en a systematic review or a meta-analysis is used to evaluate the 
body of evidence in a given fi eld.
 
■
All websites have a frequently asked questions (FAQ) section or include a clear expla-
nation of the information on the website.
For many reasons, a detailed explanation of each website is not feasible. One reason, for 
example, is that the programs in the database and the sorting features constantly change, so 
detailed explanations would quickly be outdated. Some information is needed, however, to 
understand these new and much-needed tools for public health practitioners implementing evi-
dence-informed programs. Th ree websites with evidence-informed programs are reviewed here 
and Table 12.1 describes the intended user of the website, the methodology of selecting interven-
tions to review, and the ratings used.
 
■
Th e What Works for Health program database is sponsored by Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation. Th is full-service website includes “a menu of evidence-informed pol-
icies and programs that can make a diff erence locally.”11 Th e intervention database 
is one component of the County Health Rankings & Roadmaps website that also 
includes information and resources on assessment, prioritization, evaluation, and 
collaboration.11
 
■
Th e Community Guide is sponsored by the Community Preventive Services Task Force. 
Th e Guide to Community Preventive Services (Th e Community Guide) includes 
evidence-based programs that consider health outcomes and cost-eff ectiveness. Th e 
fi ndings are based on systematic reviews of peer-reviewed literature.21
 
■
Th e SNAP-Ed Toolkit is sponsored by the Regional Nutrition Education Centers of 
Excellence, National Coordination Center at the University of Kentucky with funding 
from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Th is intervention database is a collection of 
evidence-informed obesity prevention and policy, system, and environmental change 
interventions. Th e interventions in the toolkit are only a partial list of interventions 
that are used in SNAP-Ed (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Education). All 
the interventions are intended to achieve the goal of helping SNAP-eligible households 
make healthy eating and physical activity choices on a limited budget.22
Independent of the website’s focus or intent, they all have information for practitioners looking 
for evidence-informed programs. A public health nutritionist working for a local health depart-
ment could fi nd possible program ideas in the website oriented toward nonprofi t hospital staff . A 
practitioner could review many websites to generate a list of evidence-informed program ideas. 
Users should fi nd programs that will address the community health goal and outcome objectives 
and should be smart and creative in using the website databases. For example, a program with evi-
dence of eff ectiveness in community-based obesity control and prevention can be considered by a 
cancer prevention program even if the program is not in Research-Tested Intervention Programs 
(RTIPs), a database of evidence-based cancer control interventions, because obesity is a risk fac-
tor for some forms of cancer.
Armed with defi nitions, an understanding of the nuances of evidence-informed work, and 
several websites with evidence-informed programs, a practitioner is ready to fi nd, choose, and 
implement evidence-informed programs. Practitioners and researchers note that these actual 
tasks of selecting and implementing programs are a science and an art. Th e science part is select-
ing programs based on epidemiological, behavioral, and policy research showing which interven-
tions are likely to be eff ective in addressing the problems.14 Th e art is in the application so that the 


===PAGE 322===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
297
TABLE 12.1 WEBSITES THAT REVIEW EVIDENCE-INFORMED PROGRAMS: COMPARISON OF INTENDED USER, METHODOLOGY OF SELECTING 
INTERVENTIONS FOR REVIEW, AND RATINGS USED
WHAT WORKS FOR HEALTH
COMMUNITY GUIDE
SNAP-ED TOOLKIT
Intended User 
Not specifi c, but language does call out local 
leaders wanting to create sustainable commu-
nity change.
Not specifi c, but lists possible users as public 
health and healthcare practitioners, employ-
ers, researchers, and other decision-makers.
SNAP-Ed administrators and implement-
ing agencies.
Summary of 
Methodology
To assess evidence, this resource combines 
information from science and observations 
of unbiased experts. Programs are included 
based on information from systematic review 
resources, other rating organizations, and pub-
lished and grey literature.
A team of experts considers the results 
of systematic review of interventions. The 
team includes topic experts, an economist, 
research fellows, a federal agency representa-
tive, a member of the Community Preventive 
Services Task Force, and a CDC coordinating 
scientist.
Through a peer-review process, the 
interventions are reviewed by USDA Food 
and Nutrition Service, Association of 
SNAP Nutrition Education Administrators, 
National Collaborative on Childhood 
Obesity Research, and Center for Training 
and Research Translation. Practitioners can 
submit interventions for review.
Ratings
Each program receives an evidence rating and 
a disparity rating.
The evidence ratings are:
• Scientifi cally supported
• Some evidence
• Expert opinion
• Insuffi cient evidence
• Mixed evidence
• Evidence of ineffectiveness
The disparity ratings are:
• Likely to decrease disparities
• No impact on disparities likely
• Likely to increase disparities
Each intervention receives a fi nding:
• Recommended with strong evidence
• Recommended with suffi cient evidence
• Recommended against
• Insuffi cient evidence
Each intervention is classifi ed as
• Research-tested
• Practice-tested
• Emerging
CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; SNAP-Ed, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Education; USDA, United States Department of Agriculture.


===PAGE 323===
298 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
programs selected have the greatest likelihood of success. And success will come from identifying 
the programs with the strongest evidence of eff ect balanced with partner and community mem-
ber buy-in for specifi c programs.14
Th is science and art idea has a catchphrase—evidence-informed decision-making (EIDM). Th e 
description of EIDM conveys perfectly how a practitioner selects and implements public health 
programs. EIDM involves “using research fi ndings plus public health expertise and resources, and 
knowledge about community health issues, local context, and political climate to make policy and 
programming decisions.”20 Below are fi ve fi ctional vignettes that translate the theoretical EIDM 
process into a real case story:
 
■
Several commercial business districts in a region have tried point-of-decision prompts 
for physical activity, specifi cally motivational signs near stairwells and elevators, but 
they just are not making a diff erence with workers in these neighboring business dis-
tricts. Understand that motivational signs near stairwells may not be a good program 
to try in the specifi c community despite the strong scientifi c evidence of increasing 
physical activity levels. Or, consider an assessment of workers in the area to determine 
why the point-of-decision prompts are not working.
 
■
A team of practitioners are working to fi nd and use evidence-informed programs to 
increase healthy eating and active living in a Native American community. Several 
program ideas are highly recommended by Th e Community Guide, which is spon-
sored by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Understand that the possible 
programs from this government publication may have to be put aside because of the 
distrust of the U.S. government by many people in the specifi c Native American com-
munity. Other evidence-informed programs are available and need to be considered.
 
■
A mildly eff ective intervention (making water easily available in childcare settings) 
has anecdotal evidence from some local childcare providers to reduce the amount of 
“sweet drinks” that kids are drinking. Understand that despite the weaker level of evi-
dence for the “water availability” intervention, it should be considered for implemen-
tation in more childcare settings. With time, aft er childcare providers have confi dence 
in their ability to improve the nutritional health of children in their care, a diff erent 
evidence-informed program can probably be considered that has greater evidence of 
eff ectiveness. Also, consider connecting with a researcher who could help gather evalu-
ation information on the program in childcare settings, which would contribute to the 
evidence base for “water availability” programs.
 
■
Th e child of a community health team member was hit by a vehicle while walking 
to school. Understand that despite the extremely strong evidence of increasing the 
numbers of students walking and biking to school, and the fact that the purpose of the 
program is to make walking and biking safer, the Safe Routes to Schools program may 
not be a feasible option right away.
 
■
A new medical doctor just moved to the community and wants to be involved with 
the community-based health improvement eff orts. In her previous community, the 
physician was an advisor to the community health team that was experimenting with a 
program that did not have any level of evidence of eff ectiveness other than expert opin-
ion. Th e doctor is pushing to do the same experimental program in the new commu-
nity. Consider whether the value of having the new doctor engaged in the community 
work to improve health may be more important than whether this low-level evidence 
program is done. Perhaps there are some research-based modifi cations to the program 
design that can be done to improve its level of evidence, and consider working with 
the other community to see whether with evaluation data the program could become 


===PAGE 324===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
299
a best practice. Also, remember that the experimental program does not have to be the 
only program selected to address the community health goal.
Prepare Program Plan and Management System
Before launching evidence-informed programs in a community, it is important to make a plan. A 
program plan describes step-by-step how to get started and how to stay on track. Based on what 
was learned through the community health assessment, what was envisioned in the writing of 
health goals and outcome objectives, and what was discovered while researching evidence-in-
formed interventions, a public health program plan translates the program ideas into action. A 
plan should clearly describe the who, what, when, and where of implementing the program(s).
Many public health program planning “how to” tools exist. All the tools reviewed in Chapter 
11, Community Assessments in  Public Health Nutrition, on community assessment include 
guidance on how to develop a program plan. Th ere is also an online soft ware strategic planning 
resource, called OnStrategy, used by some public health agencies to guide practitioners through 
the process of developing a program plan.23
Th e information that “should” be included in the program plan and the terminology vary with 
every resource. For example, some resources use the term “action plan” instead of “program plan,” 
or resources will refer to a coordinator versus a lead contact to describe the person who is respon-
sible for a specifi c step or activity. Th ere are several terms used to describe the objectives included 
in a program plan, such as “process objective” versus “annual objective.” In general, however, the 
plan will include a health goal, outcome objectives, intervention descriptions, process objectives, 
and details such as strategies, activities or action steps, partners, lead contact, and timeline. By 
developing a plan, practitioners can verify that health goals, outcome objectives, and intervention 
plans are logically related so that the interventions will contribute positively to the health goal. 
Th e plan template provided in Exhibit 12.324 is a good demonstration of this.
Several resources exist to help practitioners develop a plan. Th ere are program planning resources 
that provide specifi c guidance with forms that continue a process which started with community 
assessment. For example, in the Mobilizing for Action through Planning and Partnerships (MAPP) 
tool, phases four, fi ve, and six take the user from community assessment fi ndings to an action 
plan. Th e six phases of MAPP are: (a) organize for success/partnership development, (b) vision-
ing, (c) four MAPP assessments, (d) identify strategic issues, (e) formulate goals and strategies, 
and (f) action cycle.25 Th e action plan templates available on the MAPP website are examples 
from community teams that have used the MAPP planning  process: www.naccho.org/programs/
public-health-infrastructure/performance-improvement/community-health-assessment/mapp.
Another program planning resource reviewed in the community assessment chapter, 
Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation (CHANGE) Tool,26 walks the user 
through two steps to generate a detailed action plan. In Action Step 7, CHANGE instructs a user 
to complete a planning template, which calls for minimal but essential information to launch and 
maintain an intervention. Th e planning template (Exhibit 12.4)27 calls for the change strategy 
(e.g., healthy food choices at corner stores and convenience stores), the “next steps” related to the 
change strategy (e.g., generate a list of stores, meet with store owners to discuss vision and success 
stories, assess interest of store owners, form a work group of interested store owners, provide 
training and technical assistance to interested store owners), the lead contact, and the timeline. 
Th en in Step 8 (Build the Community Action Plan), CHANGE calls for much more detail with 
1-year and multiyear objectives, activities, number of people reached, etc. See the template in 
Exhibit 12.5.28


===PAGE 325===
300 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
EXHIBIT 12.3
MOVING TO THE FUTURE: PROGRAM WORK PLAN WORKSHEET
Program work plan
Strategy:
Action steps
How would you monitor and evaluate the strategy and/or action steps?
GOAL:
Process objective:
Outcome objective:
Due date
Agency responsible
Resources required
Source: From Probert KL. Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning, Chapter 3: 
 Develop a Plan – Chapter Overview. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public Health Nutritionists; 2006. 
https://movingtothefuture.org/chapter-3-develop-a-plan/develop-a-plan-chapter-overview
EXHIBIT 12.4
COMMUNITY HEALTH IMPROVEMENT PLANNING TEMPLATE
SECTOR: POLICY/ENVIRONMENTAL 
CHANGE STRATEGY 
NEXT STEPS 
LEAD/ PRIMARY 
CONTACT 
TIMELINE 
1. 
2. 
Source: From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity. 
 Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation (CHANGE) Tool: Action Step 7d: Complete the Community 
Health Improvement Planning Template. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change
-tool/actionstep7.html


===PAGE 326===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
301
If the plan is part of grant-funded work, there is almost certainly a plan template provided, 
requesting applicants to provide the information that the funder has deemed relevant and useful. 
Th ere are also generic templates available that are not tied to a specifi c program planning process. 
An example generic plan template from the Community Tool Box is provided in Exhibit 12.6.
Th e Rural Health Information Hub and Community Tool Box includes resources that provide 
step-by-step guidance for planning specifi c community programs. Th e Rural Health Information 
Hub includes a toolkit for community health program planning in rural communities plus tool-
kits for addressing specifi c community health concerns, such as chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease, food access, obesity prevention, and many more.15 And the Community Tool Box 
includes links to action planning guides for specifi c community issues, such as improving access 
and eliminating disparities in community health, promoting child well-being, and preventing 
chronic disease.29
Th ere is even a tool that helps practitioners plan interventions in the context of other interven-
tions. Th e Matrix Assisting Practitioner’s Intervention Planning Tool (MAP-IT) does not guide 
EXHIBIT 12.5
EXAMPLE OF A COMMUNITY ACTION PLAN
Project Period Objective 
Description of the Objective 
Priority Area 
Annual Objective 
Description of the Objective 
Sector 
Number of People Reached 
Activities 
Activity Title 
Description 
Source: From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity. 
 Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation (CHANGE) Tool: Action Step 8. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/
nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change-tool/actionstep8.html


===PAGE 327===
302 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
a user through the steps of planning a specifi c intervention, but instead forces practitioners to 
think through all the types of interventions needed to support behavior change—the needs of 
the individual and the needs for the environment.30 Th e assumption with public health nutrition 
is that programs will focus on changes to the environment or systems rather than changes to 
individual behavior, for example, helping hospitals achieve the Baby-Friendly designation rather 
than individual counseling to pregnant women about the benefi ts of breastfeeding. Th is focus on 
the environment or system does not suggest that the individual behavior change strategies are not 
important. Clearly, the individual makes the change that leads to improved health and quality of 
life. Th ere needs to be a focus on environmental change and individual change, and MAP-IT helps 
practitioners see the need for all interventions.
In addition to developing a program plan for evidence-informed intervention(s), a community 
health team may also develop a sustainability plan, a communication plan, and/or an evaluation 
EXHIBIT 12.6
COMMUNITY TOOL BOX ACTION PLAN TEMPLATE 
Action Plan for [Community or Initiative Name]
Community Focus Area: 
Community Change to Be Sought: 
Collaborating Organization(s) Group(s): 
 Community Sector: 
ACTION STEPS
ACTION 
STEPS
BY 
WHOM
BY WHEN
RESOURCES AND 
SUPPORT
AVAILABLE/NEEDED
POTENTIAL 
BARRIERS OR 
RESISTANCE
COMMUNICATION 
PLAN FOR 
IMPLEMENTATION
What 
needs to 
be done?
Who 
will take 
actions?
By what 
date will the 
action be 
done?
Resources 
available
Resources 
needed 
(fi nancial, 
human, 
political, 
and other)
What individuals 
and organi-
zations might 
resist? How?
What individuals and 
organizations should 
be informed about/
involved with these 
actions?
Step 1:
By
________
Step 2:
By
________
Step 3:
By
________
Step 4:
By
________
Source: From KU Center for Community Health and Development. Chapter 3, Section 1: Developing a Plan for 
 Assessing Local Needs and Resources. Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas; 2019. http://ctb.ku.edu/en/
table-of-contents/assessment/assessing-community-needs-and-resources/develop-a-plan/main


===PAGE 328===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
303
plan that accompanies the program plan. Some community health teams might, instead, incor-
porate sustainability, communication, and evaluation objectives and related activities into the 
program plan.
Sustainability planning considers ways to sustain funding, activities, success, partners, out-
comes, system changes, and community commitment to good health and wellness.31–33 Several 
public health resources include additional information on sustainability plans.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “an evaluation plan is a written 
document that describes how you will monitor and evaluate your program, so that you will be 
able to describe the 'What,' the 'How,' and the 'Why It Matters' for your program and use evalua-
tion results for program improvement and decision making.”34 An evaluation plan is designed to 
answer questions that partners, the community, the funder, and the practitioners most involved 
in implementation have about the program. Two example evaluation questions would be: What 
were the eff ects of the Farm to Preschool programs on children’s fruit and vegetable consump-
tion? Or Did the Farm to Preschool programs benefi t local farms? Th e evaluation plan will yield a 
report with results on how successful the program was and recommendations on how to improve 
the intervention(s).
A communication plan describes who will receive information, when to send the information, 
and how the information will be shared. Regarding the public health nutrition program plan-
ning process, a communication plan can help the community and partners understand commu-
nity health concerns, possible solutions, progress with program implementation, and program 
results.35
Planning is critical to implementing successful evidence-informed programs and interven-
tions, and several tools are available to help public health nutrition practitioners develop plans. 
Th e challenge, however, is to not become paralyzed in the planning step. Not all of these plans 
have to be done perfectly every year.
Identifi cation of Resources and Collaborations
Public health nutritionists always need to partner with others to do their work. Evidence-
informed public health nutrition programs call for changes to a system that is owned or con-
trolled by others, and that is the primary reason for identifying partners and resources when 
planning programs. Each intervention presented here could be led by a public health nutrition 
professional and would require collaboration with other people and organizations: increasing the 
healthy food choices in vending machines; training home visiting staff  to deliver simple, healthy 
eating messages to clients; encouraging obstetricians to screen for excessive weight gain and refer 
to a qualifi ed professional for additional weight management counseling; implementing school 
wellness policies; launching a school garden and school salad bar project; increasing the number 
of breastfeeding-friendly childcare centers; increasing fruit and vegetable choices in the Child and 
Adult Care Food Program; and the list goes on.
Collaboration is also required to sustain the eff ect of successful, evidence-informed public 
health nutrition programs. Bringing together diff erent organizations with similar goals plus orga-
nizations with diff erent goals, but that benefi t from the system and health changes and improve-
ments, will signifi cantly increase the long-term eff ects of one’s work.36
Every community will have diff erent types of assets that can help to implement and sustain 
public health interventions or outcomes. Th rough the process of conducting a community health 
assessment and the process of developing a program plan, a list of community resources and 
partners will emerge. A list of potential partners and other resources helpful to implementing and 


===PAGE 329===
304 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
sustaining programs that improve access to healthy, aff ordable foods and safe places for physical 
activity in communities is provided here:
 
■
Community members—look for people with time, expertise, and connections. Be open 
and inclusive of people who are not typically invited to transform their community, 
but who have knowledge about the community, such as a stay-at-home parent or local 
librarian or volunteer fi refi ghter. Also, consider individuals with expertise in specifi c 
areas related to your goals, such as a master gardener, or with skills in services you 
need like a social media expert. Everyone in the community has abilities and talents to 
contribute.
 
■
Formal community leaders—these people are commonly thought of as partners, but 
they are oft en very busy: elected persons, government agency heads, local business 
owners, and board members of local nonprofi t organizations.
 
■
Community groups—associations, local foundations, civic groups, faith-based orga-
nizations, local government agencies and businesses, economic development corpora-
tions, service clubs, etc.
 
■
Community services—public transportation, community sports facilities, early care 
and education centers and homes, community recycling facilities, cooperative exten-
sion, public health agencies, other government agencies, municipal parks and recre-
ation centers, senior activity centers, cultural organizations, community colleges or 
universities, community centers, etc.
 
■
Food-related groups—food service organizations, food vendors, local food policy 
council, farmers, farm bureaus, grocers, food pantries and food banks, regional dietetic 
associations, state or regional checkoff  organizations (beef, dairy, almond, mushroom, 
etc.), SNAP-Ed providers, Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP) providers, 
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) clinics, etc.
 
■
Health groups—doctors, dentists, physician practices, hospitals, health clinics, non-
profi t voluntary health agencies (e.g., American Heart Association, American Cancer 
Society), home health agencies, etc.
 
■
State and federal experts—food, nutrition, agriculture, and health expert staff  in gov-
ernment agencies or state-level organizations.
 
■
Physical structures or places—land and buildings, such as schools, hospitals, churches, 
libraries, recreation centers, social clubs, unused buildings, empty lots, parks, wetlands, 
or other open spaces.
 
■
Financial resources—local foundations, Foundation Center; grants.gov; state 
health department website; state council, society, or association of foundations; Th e 
Grantsmanship Center; Rural Health Information Hub.
Th is list was generated based on information from the Community Tool Box about partner-
ships and community assets and resources37,38 and a manual written by faculty at the Asset-Based 
Community Development Institute.39
Th is planning phase is the opportune time to coordinate and combine resources with partners 
to build successful public health nutrition programs.
Implementation and Monitoring of Program Effectiveness
Finally, it is time to carry out the planned activities. Th e program plan will include steps to get 
started, and when to the point of actually implementing the specifi c program (e.g., healthy food 


===PAGE 330===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
305
initiatives in food banks) a practitioner can return to the websites with evidence-informed pro-
grams for how-to guidance.
Th e scope of the program plan and the capacity of the team leading implementation of the plan 
will dictate how the work will be managed. Th e approach to plan management may be centralized 
or decentralized. With a centralized model of managing implementation, there is one person 
or a small group managing and directing the work. Th e centralized model of implementation 
would more likely be used if the program plan has only a few interventions. For example, a few 
practitioners would manage a program plan with the health goal of improving children’s eating 
habits that has two activities focused on early care and education settings—farm to preschool and 
breastfeeding-friendly child care centers.
With a decentralized model, there are several people or organizations leading major portions 
of the plan. Th e decentralized model of implementation would be used if the program plan was 
comprehensive and involved the work of many organizations and included several activities. An 
example would be a countywide health plan focused on healthy eating and active living with 
interventions in multiple settings (early care and education centers, hospitals, schools, com-
munity facilities, small grocers, and local government buildings), where diff erent organizations 
would be leaders for the activities in a setting or two.
Whether management is centralized or decentralized, monitoring progress using the program 
plan should be done as oft en as determined by the lead workers. Basic checks on whether activi-
ties are being accomplished according to the timeline is a good place to start.
CONCLUSION
Program planning falls between community health needs assessment and interventions. Th is, of 
course, makes sense because practitioners must get organized aft er learning what the community 
wants and needs to improve community health and before launching new programs. In public health 
nutrition practice, much of the information in this chapter will be used and referred to throughout 
one’s career. For practitioners who enjoy getting organized, the challenge will be to not spend too 
much time planning and get everything perfect before starting programs. For practitioners who race 
through the steps of getting organized, it will be essential to spend time at each step addressed in 
this chapter to increase the chance of implementing a successful public health nutrition program.
KEY CONCEPTS
 
■
Th e seven steps to planning programs are (1) review community assessment results, 
(2) defi ne health goals and objectives, (3) understand evidence-informed programs, 
(4) fi nd evidence-informed programs, (5) write a plan, (6) identify partners and other 
resources, and (7) implement and monitor.
 
■
Compile community health concerns and community assets based on community 
health assessment results. Do not judge or modify the list based on personal opinion.
 
■
Health goals are written based on community health concerns and provide long-term 
vision for the program plan. Goals are positive, broad-based, and without time frames.
 
■
Objectives are pathways to achieving the goal. Outcome objectives logically related to a 
health goal, take at least 3 years to achieve, and address changes in health behaviors or 
in health status.


===PAGE 331===
306 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
 
■
SMART objectives are specifi c, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time bound. All 
objectives should meet these SMART criteria.
 
■
Practitioners need to choose programs or interventions with evidence of a positive 
eff ect on the health goal and/or outcome objectives.
 
■
Evidence-based public health, evidence-based program, eff ective program, promising 
program, emerging program, best practice, and practice-based evidence are all terms 
that are imprecisely used by many practitioners, but these terms do have specifi c, pre-
cise defi nitions.
 
■
An evidence-based program follows research protocols in design and implementa-
tion. Evidence-informed programs are based on some level of evidence that shows 
they will have a positive eff ect on health. Evidence-informed programs include 
evidence-based programs plus eff ective, promising, and emerging programs, and best 
practices.
 
■
Several websites exist with evidence-informed programs and most websites have a 
database that dynamically generates a list of programs based on criteria selected. Th e 
websites diff er in many ways including, but not limited to, who the intended user of the 
website is and what rating system is used.
 
■
Th e value of using evidence-informed public health programs can be summarized in 
two words: cost and respect.
 
■
Selecting and implementing programs are a science and an art, and can best be 
described by the term evidence-informed decision-making (EIDM), which involves 
using research fi ndings plus public health expertise and resources, and knowledge 
about community health issues, local context, and political climate to make policy and 
programming decisions.
 
■
A program plan clearly describes the who, what, when, and where of implementing 
programs. Generally, a plan includes a health goal, outcome objectives, intervention 
description(s), process objectives, and details such as strategies, action steps, partners, 
lead contact, and timeline. Several plan templates exist to use as designed or to modify 
as needed.
 
■
Plans that address sustainability, evaluation, and communication can accompany the 
program plan.
 
■
Planning is critical; however, do not become paralyzed by only planning.
 
■
Public health nutritionists always need to partner with others to do their work. 
Evidence-informed, public health nutrition programs call for changes to a system that 
is owned or controlled by others. Every community has resources including people, 
organizations, and physical structures to help implement public health nutrition 
programs.
 
■
With a centralized model of managing implementation, there is one person or a small 
group managing and directing the work. Th e centralized model of implementation 
would likely be used if the program plan has only a few interventions.
 
■
With a decentralized model, there are several people or organizations leading major 
portions of the plan. Th e decentralized model of implementation would be used if the 
program plan was comprehensive and involved the work of many organizations and 
included several activities.


===PAGE 332===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
307
CASE STUDY: THE HOWARD COUNTY HOMETOWN HEALTH 
IMPROVEMENT COALITION: IMPROVING NUTRITION AND 
INCREASING ACCESS TO HEALTHY FOODS IN HOWARD 
COUNTY, ARKANSAS
Th e population of Howard County was approximately 15,000 in 2003. Th e county seat is Nashville, 
Arkansas, which had a population of 4,782.40 Th e county is designated medically underserved by 
the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).40
Th e Howard County Hometown Health Improvement (HHI) Coalition began in 2003. Th e 
HHI Coalition serves all of Howard County, although most activities were concentrated in 
Nashville, Arkansas.40 According to the 2003 BRFSS, 80% of adults in the county reported not 
eating the recommended amount of vegetables, 42% of adults reported no leisure time physical 
activity, and 70% to 80% did not get the recommended physical activity. Th e adult obesity rate 
was 68%, and 58% of adults reported a diagnosis of hypertension. Th e active members identifi ed 
the need for a change in culture and attitudes regarding health. Education and engagement in the 
larger community was needed. Th e Coalition wanted to do something like a community garden.
Th e 2005 Committee goals40 were to:
 
■
Improve the nutrition of low-income county residents
 
■
Provide healthy foods to needy county residents
 
■
Expand availability of aff ordable fresh produce and healthy foods
 
■
Partner with existing community programs to access target populations
 
■
Generate community support for program sustainability
Committee Projects40
1. 
Veggie Swap Shop: A weekly Veggie Swap Shop was implemented at New Light CME 
Church. Th e produce was coupled with existing food pantry items for senior adults. 
Th e Veggie Swap Shop Program expanded to include the local Senior Citizen Center 
and the Senior Outreach Program. Produce not distributed through the church was 
taken to the Senior Citizen Center for distribution during the week or delivered to 
homebound senior adults through the Senior Outreach Program. Th e Veggie Swap 
idea began from a conversation at a Coalition meeting (2005).
2. 
Plant an Extra Row (2006): A media campaign began in February to encourage 
gardeners to plant extra produce for donation to the Veggie Swap Shop. Local seed 
retailers donated seed to support the project.
3. 
Program Garden (2006): Th e Veggie Swap Committee hosted a Community Coff ee 
to gain support for a Program Garden. Th e City of Nashville, Arkansas, donated land 
adjacent to the Senior Citizen Center for the community garden. Community volun-
teers and 4-H students started the garden, but there was not suffi  cient infrastructure 
to coordinate and maintain the garden. Th e local Master Gardener club took over the 
garden as a teaching garden. Harvest was donated to Veggie Swap targeting area senior 
adults. In 2007, there was so much community support for the idea that three locations 
committed to provide space, supplies, and volunteers for gardens in the county. Th e 
three locations were the Senior Citizen Center, Stepping Stones Day Care, and Dierks 


===PAGE 333===
308 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Nursing and Rehab Center. Local 4-H groups were utilized as volunteers to plant the 
gardens. Other local children joined them just for fun. Th e students in the summer and 
aft er-school programs worked in the garden. It was a great educational opportunity for 
the youth. Senior adults were provided nutrition education sessions by the Cooperative 
Extension Offi  ce with help from the 4-H youth.
4. 
Demonstration Organic Garden (2008): Crops grown in the demonstration garden 
were donated through the Veggie Swap Committee. Raised beds, an irrigation system, 
and fencing were built.
Outcomes noted were free, healthy produce for those in need: an outlet for local gardeners to 
donate produce, and public workshops focusing on organic, low-maintenance gardening.40
As the Veggie Swap and Demonstration Garden projects matured, the HHI Coalition began 
an eff ort to identify the perceived needs and interest of the community for additional projects. 
Th e HHI Coalition members presented at community and civic club meetings. Th ey held focus 
group and key informant interviews. Th e Coalition engaged decision-makers such as mayors and 
city council members. Th ey decided to establish a Farmers’ Market with nutrition education.41 
Th e key stakeholders were behind it. Th e goals of the program were to provide a means for area 
residents to acquire fresh locally grown produce and a centralized location for local farmers and 
gardeners to sell produce. It was also designed as a location for workshops, health fairs, public 
social activities, and other events.40
Partners:40
 
■
Red Dirt Master Gardeners
 
■
Howard County Health Improvement
 
■
Howard County
 
■
City of Nashville, Arkansas
 
■
Howard County Health Department
 
■
Senior Outreach Program
 
■
Howard County Cooperative Extension Service and 4H
 
■
Howard County Sheriff ’s Offi  ce
 
■
Area businesses
 
■
Individuals
Funding and resources:
 
■
Grant funds: $29,750 construction costs
 
■
Howard County: land, grading, and dirt work; maintenance of pavilion and parking 
areas
 
■
City of Nashville, Arkansas: grass mowing
 
■
Chamber of Commerce: administrative costs
 
■
Howard County Health Improvement Coalition/Red Dirt Master Gardeners: raised 
beds, demonstration garden, and activities held there
 
■
Red Dirt Master Gardeners: on-site management during hours market is open
 
■
Vendor rental fees: operational funds for the Farmers' Market (utilities, advertising, 
etc.)


===PAGE 334===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
309
Growing Healthy Communities (GHC) Immersion Training is a project of the Arkansas Coalition 
for Obesity Prevention (ArCOP) to build capacity within communities to reduce obesity by 
increasing physical activity and access to healthy foods, and implementing environmental and pol-
icy changes that support healthy living. Attendance by the community chief executive offi  cer (e.g., 
mayor, county judge, university president) along with two additional decision-makers and fi ve 
community implementers (e.g., city planner, members of chamber of commerce, school board, 
local public health administrator) is required. Th e training included networking with and presen-
tations by national, state, and local leaders on evidence-informed interventions to address access 
to healthy foods and physical activity, community assessment, and coalition building/community 
engagement. Facilitated strategic planning for each community began at the training with instruc-
tion for completion back home. An initial community needs assessment was required for GHC 
application. Following the GHC training, the communities were required to complete a compre-
hensive assessment, implement strategies, and ensure that the strategies are sustained. Howard 
County successfully applied for GHC Immersion Training and funding.
Following the ArCOP GHC Immersion Training, the Howard County HHI Coalition’s 
Veggie Swap Committee formalized the GHC Committee to develop and implement Nashville, 
Arkansas’s plan. In April, the Committee submitted their plan to ArCOP, who approved the plan 
following some minor modifi cations. Nashville, Arkansas’s 2011 “4G” (Get Informed, Get Active, 
Get Involved, and Get Healthy) Initiative was broad in scope and included a number of strategies/
activities to promote physical activity and improve access to healthy nutrition.42 Th ese strategies/
activities were:
1. Develop a website to coordinate Growing Healthy Communities’ activities with other 
community activities and events—“One Place to Go to Find Out What Is Happening!”
2. Develop a series of 12 “NFD TV” programs for local television each composed of 
three 10-minute modules dealing with healthy nutrition and physical activity. While 
the programs were developed for local television and were televised during 2012, the 
modules were also used for community workshops, educational activities, and media 
promotions.
3. Develop a series of 12-weekly, 30-minute radio talk programs to promote healthy 
nutrition and physical activity, and to highlight upcoming and on-going events related 
to healthy lifestyles.
4. Develop a volunteer engagement strategy.
5. Create a partnership with Nashville, Arkansas School District. Quarterly meetings 
between the Coalition and school nurses were initiated and the Coalition funded the 
SPARK curriculum for the junior high school.
6. Develop community gardens.
7. Integrate organic farming methods in the local agriculture industry.
8. Complete the certifi ed kitchen at the farmers’ market (for cooking demonstrations and 
nutrition workshops, and for growers to process locally grown produce for sale at market).
9. Increase the number of growers participating at the farmers’ market. Ten new growers 
participated.
10. Off er a series of health screenings, workshops, and cooking demonstrations encourag-
ing healthy nutrition. Five healthy cooking demonstrations were given by the Howard 
County Extension Agent.


===PAGE 335===
310 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
11. Initiate policy that encourages/supports physical activity and healthy nutrition. 
Initial plans were for each GHC participant to look for policy changes within their 
organizations to encourage healthy nutrition and physical activity, and implement 
any desired changes possible. Nashville, Arkansas Parks and Recreation immediately 
made improvement in selections at park concession stands; Howard County Farmers’ 
Market continued to enforce its policy that unhealthy choices will not be served in 
market-sponsored events; and Howard County Memorial Hospital added a baked or 
broiled meat selection to their cafeteria line and expanded salad bar items. Evaluating 
existing policy and looking for areas of improvement have become a strategy that is 
planned to continue in the future.
12. Complete a walkability, bikeability, rollability assessment. Th ree routes were evaluated 
(City Park to schools, City Park to Downtown, and Downtown to Farmers’ Market) 
over four high-traffi  c periods.
13. Improve Hispanic participation through the following activities: (1) identify leaders 
and others in the Hispanic community and get at least one representative on the GHC 
Committee, (2) translate farmers’ market informational brochures, registration forms, 
and other items into Spanish, and (3) identify potential Hispanic growers and encour-
age participation at the market.
In 2014, another assessment and strategic planning process was conducted as part of GHC 
grant funding. Th is included a Photovoice assessment and presentation.41 Th e resulting initia-
tive was called “Eating Fresher in Howard County 2017.” Th e goal of “Eating Fresher in Howard 
County 2017” is linking community resources to improve nutrition behaviors while increasing 
consumption of and access to locally grown fresh produce.
Th e primary strategy is to promote self-effi  cacy regarding health behaviors, utilizing com-
munity health awareness campaigns and traditional focused training. Other strategies were the 
establishment of individual and community sustainable gardens, amplifi ed grower participation, 
local farmers’ markets, and continued education to increase consumption of fresh produce. Th e 
funded activities enhanced and expanded previous eff orts in promoting healthy lifestyles through 
partnerships. Th e GHC projects included direct education that aff ects primary and secondary 
targets, but also leaning heavily on media campaigns to raise awareness for all county residents 
and the surrounding area.43
Th e 2017 “Eating Fresher in Howard County” project has directly reached more than 2,967 
people, including adults and children.43
Activity 1—Program Promotion: Th e “Getting the Word Out” program promotion includes 
project notices in each local newspaper, two radio stations, email notices, Facebook, and various 
local websites.43
Activity 2—“You Can Do It Gardens” has directly reached a total of 342 individuals through 
the Square Foot Garden Class, Square Foot Garden Club activities at local community gardens, 
and the Farm to Table Summit for 6th graders.43
Activity 3—“Community & Universally Accessible (UA) Garden” project reached more than 
3,300 people at gardening, beekeeping, and drip irrigation workshops and activities.43
Activity 4—Physical Activity & Nutrition Programs. In 2017, more than 392 individuals par-
ticipated in the cooking demonstrations and tastings at Howard County Farmers’ Market. Th e 
Farm to Table School Summit had 240 participants. Desk cyclers purchased for sixth-grade stu-
dents. Approximately 61 Extension Homemakers received training on food preservation.43


===PAGE 336===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
311
Activity 5—Regional Grower Training in 2016 targeted all 17 counties in southwest Arkansas. 
In 2017, the GHC Committee organized training with 298 participants.43
Activity 6—Healthy Living Libraries includes the “Master Gardener Special Collection” of gar-
dening, recipe, and nutrition books and the existing “Beekeeping Special Collection” located at 
the public library.43
More information is available at the Nashville Arkansas Growing Healthy Communities web-
site at nashvilleghc.com/fullscreen-slider.44
In December 2017, the Howard County HHI Coalition conducted a strategic planning day to 
revise the Committee work plans. Th e facilitated planning process asked the coalition members to 
determine what is being done now that needs to be sustained and how to sustain or do the activ-
ity better in the coming year. Th is included determination of all resources needed and available 
(funding, volunteers, training needs, etc.). Specifi c Action Steps for each project were developed. 
Th ese include:
 
■
Specifi c dates/schedules where possible
 
■
Specifi c resources needed and how they will be secured
 
■
Assigned volunteers, volunteer recruitment plan (included training needs)
Note: Community gardens, farmers’ markets, and fruit and vegetable tasting all have evidence 
ratings of “Some Evidence” according to “What Works For Health,” a Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation database of strategies with ratings of eff ectiveness. Urban agriculture, food hubs, and 
fruit and vegetable gleaning programs are all rated as “expert opinion.” School gardens and fruit 
and vegetable incentive programs, such as “Double up bucks” for SNAP participants are rated as 
“scientifi cally supported.” Th rough the years and iterations of committee and action plans, the 
Howard County community has used these or adaptations of these strategies among others.11
Case Study Questions
1. 
What were some of the community assessment fi ndings reviewed by the HHI 
Coalition?
2. 
Are the health goals related to the health assessment fi ndings? Explain why or why not?
3. Outcome objectives are not included in the case study, but can you write one or two 
outcome objectives that meet SMART criteria that could be feasible for this case 
study?
4. 
Explain whether the initial committee projects were evidence-informed programs? 
And what about the activities done later?
5. 
Given the initial list of committee projects and later added activities, what partners and 
other resources were essential? Were there other community partners and resources 
that could have been included?
6. 
With information in the case study, create a program plan using any of the sample plan 
templates included in this chapter.
7. 
Would this plan be managed using a centralized or decentralized model? Explain.
8. 
Th is community was very successful! What were some of their successes? What might 
be some of the reasons for their success?
9. 
What projects and activities seemed interesting to you and why?


===PAGE 337===
312 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
An essay: Answer the following questions. Consider the Howard County case study 
and our class discussions about program planning models and methods.
 
■
What Health Goals were identifi ed in 2003?
 
■
What are some examples of where the community might have used concepts of 
evidence-informed decision-making?
 
■
How did the community increase the likelihood of sustainability?
 
■
Where might they have obtained ideas for evidence-informed strategies/
programs?
 
■
What assets/resources did the committee identify for implementation and 
sustainability?
 
■
Choose one activity from the 2011 4G initiative and one activity from the 2017 
Eat Fresher in Howard County initiative and write one SMART objective for each 
initiative with the information provided in the case study.
2. Team assignment (continued from Chapter 11, Community Assessments in 
Public Health Nutrition): Teams will consist of three to four students per team 
randomly grouped by the instructor. Th ey may be assigned community member 
roles.
 
■
Group work during class:

{
Review the community assessment

{
Determine one health goal

{
Determine a model for use in developing your community action plan

{
Exchange phone numbers, discuss possible group meeting times

{
Review and make sure you all understand the overall assignment

{
Divide up workload, assign responsibilities
 
■
Written plan:

{
Plan should be double-spaced, typed, and without grammatical errors. All 
components listed below must be included and written in correct format. Th e 
following components must be included:

{
Title of program

{
Names of team members

{
Mini “community action plan”
 
Complete each step in a planning model resulting in a mini community 
action plan addressing the health goal
 
Brief assessment report from the Chapter 11, Community Assessments 
in Public Health Nutrition, community assessment assignment
 
Health and/or nutrition status of the target population
 
Available resources (assets)
 
Two to three SMART objectives
 
Evidence-informed strategies


===PAGE 338===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
313
 
Method of monitoring (how will you measure success)
 
Sustainability plan
3. 
Oral presentation:
 
■
Presentation: 5–10 minutes
 
■
It is the team’s choice as to whether or not all group members will be present; how-
ever, all team members must come to the front of the classroom.
 
■
Audiovisual aids are recommended but not required.
 
■
Th e presentation should involve a broad overview of your goals and implementa-
tion plan.
 
■
Any necessary audiovisual equipment should be prearranged with the instructor.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
 
■
What is evidence-informed decision-making?
 
■
What is the diff erence between evidence-based, eff ective, promising, emerging, and 
best practice programs?
 
■
What are four components of the Evidence-Based Practice Model?
 
■
What are the seven steps to program planning?
 
■
Why is it important to review community assessment results as the fi rst step to devel-
oping a program plan?
 
■
What is the diff erence between goals and objectives?
 
■
What are SMART objectives?
 
■
What is the diff erence between evidence-based and practice-based evidence?
 
■
What is the diff erence between evidence-based public health and evidence-based 
programs?
 
■
What are the levels of evidence of public health programs?
 
■
How can a practitioner fi nd evidence-informed programs? List four sources.
 
■
Why is selecting and implementing programs described as a science and an art?
 
■
In general, what are the components included in a program plan?
 
■
What are the other three plans that might accompany a program plan or be incorpo-
rated into the program plan?
 
■
What are some types of community resources and who are some potential partners?
 
■
What is the diff erence between a centralized and decentralized model of managing 
implementation of the plan?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Assessment Planning Models
Th e CDC has several assessment planning models that can be found at https://www.cdc.gov/stlt
publichealth/cha/index.html and https://www.cdc.gov/stltpublichealth/cha/assessment.html#four.
Organization(s): Centers for Disease Prevention and Control


===PAGE 339===
314 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Global Childhood Obesity Recommendations
Th e National Collaborative on Childhood Obesity Research (NCCOR) has resources and recom-
mendations for research and for communities to help reduce childhood obesity around the word 
at https://www.nccor.org/projects/globallessons. You can also learn more about evidence and key 
concepts for Health, Behavioral Design, and the Built Environment at https://www.nccor.org/
projects/health-built-environment.
Organization(s): National Collaborative on Childhood Obesity Research (NCCOR)
The Community Guide
Th e Community Guide is a repository of evidence-based and promising policies, programs, or 
strategies on a wide range of topics related to health and disease prevention in communities, 
including asthma, physical activity, and tobacco.
Organization(s): Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Evidence-Based Practice
Website
Resources on child well-being and use of rigorously evaluated programs that target the needs 
of children and helping them have healthy development: https://www.aecf.org/work/evidence
-based-practice and https://www.aecf.org/work/evidence-based-practice/evidence2success.
Organization(s): Annie E. Casey Foundation
Promising Practices from the WICHE Project Archive
Video/Multimedia
Th e webinar is a technical assistance guide for communities running promising practices in rural 
America to understand what qualifi es their work as a “promising practice.” Th e guide also pro-
vides information about the strategies, methodologies, and resources necessary to become evi-
denced-based practices: https://www.wiche.edu/archive/mh/promisingPractices.
Organization(s): Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education
Date: 10/2010
Evidence-Based Public Health
Tutorial/Training
Th is online book is a tutorial in evidence-based public health. It introduces readers to the main 
themes associated with the topic and provides useful resources for further learning. In particular, 
it describes analytical strategies and literature review methods that can help practitioners inte-
grate the concepts in their own work: https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/rural-toolkit/2/
evidence-base.
Organization(s): Rural Health Information Hub45
Mobilizing Action through Planning and Partnerships (MAPP)
Webinars/Handbook
To learn more about using MAPP you can access a free MAPP Handbook and webinars.


===PAGE 340===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
315
Free MAPP Handbook: http://eweb.naccho.org/eweb/DynamicPage.aspx?WebCode=proddetail
add&ivd_qty=1&ivd_prc_prd_key=8cb05f83-904e-471b-b588-8c51e9628c8b&Action=Add
&site=naccho&ObjectKeyFrom=1A83491A-9853-4C87-86A4-F7D95601C2E2&DoNotSave
=yes&ParentObject=CentralizedOrderEntry&ParentDataObject=Invoice%20Detail.
MAPP webinars and resources: https://www.naccho.org/programs/public-health-infrastructure/
performance-improvement/community-health-assessment/mapp.
Organization(s): National Association of County and City Health Offi  cials (NACCHO)
GLOSSARY
Community environment: Programs, services, and resources available in a community and 
their quality attributes, plus community infl uencers, and social networks.
Epidemiologist: A scientist who studies the incidence, prevalence, spread, and distribution 
patterns of disease conditions and risk factors in populations.
Farm to Preschool: Encompasses eff orts to serve local or regionally produced foods in early 
childcare and education settings; provides hands-on learning activities, such as gardening, 
farm visits, and culinary activities; and integrates food-related education into the curriculum 
(from a USDA factsheet).
Opinion and perception information: Perceived needs, priorities, norms, and values of the 
priority population and other constituencies and stakeholders.
Population data: Sociodemographic descriptors and indicators of the health and nutritional 
status of the selected population.
Public policy environment: Relevant public policy issues and their status, including related 
legislation, regulation, ordinances, etc. at local, state, and national levels as well as national 
standards and guidelines from government agencies.
Safe Routes to Schools: "[A]n approach that promotes walking and bicycling to school through 
infrastructure improvements, enforcement, tools, safety education, and incentives to encour-
age walking and bicycling to school.46
REFERENCES
1. Association for Community Health Improvement. Community Health Assessment Toolkit: Step 6: 
Document and Communicate Results. 2017. https://www.healthycommunities.org/resources/toolkit/fi les/
step6-document-community-results
2. Probert K. Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning, Chapter 1: Community 
Assessment, Summarize and Report Information. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public Health 
Nutritionists; 2006. https://movingtothefuture.org/chapter-1-community-assessment/summarizing-
and-reporting-information
3. Association for Community Health Improvement. Community Health Assessment Toolkit: Step 7: Plan 
Implementation Strategies. 2017. https://www.healthycommunities.org/resources/toolkit/fi les/step7-plan
-implementation
4. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 
8, Section 5: Developing an Action Plan. 2019. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/structure/strategic
-planning/develop-action-plans/main
5. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 
3, Section 23: Developing and Using Criteria and Processes to Set Priorities. 2019. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/
table-of-contents/assessment/assessing-community-needs-and-resources/criteria-and-processes-to
-set-priorities/main


===PAGE 341===
316 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
6. National Association of County and City Health Offi  cials. Mobilizing for Action Th rough Planning 
and Partnerships (MAPP): Phase 4: Identifying and Prioritizing Strategic Issues. 2019. https://www.
naccho.org/programs/public-health-infrastructure/performance-improvement/community-health-
assessment/mapp/phase-4-identify-strategic-issues
7. Probert K. Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning, Chapter 2: Identify 
Priorities, Goals and Objectives, Writing Goals—Overview. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public Health 
Nutritionists; 2006. https://movingtothefuture.org/chapter-2-determine-goals/writing-goals-overview
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, Division for Heart Disease and Stroke Prevention, State Heart Disease and Stroke 
Prevention Program. Evaluation Guide Writing SMART Objectives. 2017:3–4. https://www.cdc.gov/
dhdsp/evaluation_resources/guides/writing-smart-objectives.htm
9. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 
Healthy People 2020. 2019. https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/About-Healthy-People/Development
-Healthy-People-2030/Framework
10. Community Preventive Services Task Force. Guide to Community Preventive Services. Obesity: Worksite 
Programs. 2019. https://www.thecommunityguide.org/fi ndings/obesity-worksite-programs
11. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. County Health Rankings and Roadmaps What Works for Health: 
Increase Access to Healthy Food Options. 2019. https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/take-action
-to-improve-health/what-works-for-health/policies?f%5B0%5D=field_program_health_factors%
3A12058&f%5B1%5D=fi eld_program_topics%3A24736
12. Satterfi eld JM, Spring B, Brownson RC, et al. Toward a transdisciplinary model of evidence-based 
practice. Milbank Q. 2009;87(2):368–390. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2009.00561
13. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. Evidence-Based Clinical and Public Health: Generating 
and Applying the Evidence. Secretary’s advisory committee on national health promotion and 
disease prevention objectives for 2020; 2010. https://www.healthypeople.gov/sites/default/fi les/
EvidenceBasedClinicalPH2010.pdf
14. Brownson RC, Fielding JE, Maylahn CM. Evidence-based public health: a fundamental concept 
for public health practice. Annu Rev Public Health. 2009;30:175–201. doi:10.1146/annurev
.publhealth.031308.100134
15. Rural Health Information Hub. Rural Health Information Hub Evidence-Based Toolkits for Rural 
Community Health. 2018. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits
16. Vanagas G, Bala M, Lhachimi K. Evidence-based public health 2017. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:2607397. 
doi:10.1155/2017/2607397
17. Lhachimi SK, Bala MM, Vanagas G. Evidence-based public health. Biomed Res Int. 2016;2016:5681409. 
doi:10.1155/2016/5681409
18. Ammerman A, Smith TW, Larissa C. Practice-based evidence in public health: improving reach, relevance, 
and results. Annu Rev Public Health. 2014;35(1):47–63. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182458
19. Ng E, de Colombani P. Framework for selecting best practices in public health: a systematic literature 
review. J Public Health Res. 2015;4(3):577. doi:10.4081/jphr.2015.577
20. Yost J, Dobbins M, Traynor R, et al. Tools to support evidence-informed public health decision making. 
BMC Public Health. 2014;14:728. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-728
21. Community Preventative Services Task Force. Guide to Community Preventive Services. 2019. https://
www.thecommunityguide.org
22. U.S. Department of Agriculture. SNAP-ed Toolkit. 2018. https://wicworks.fns.usda.gov
23. OnStrategy. OnStrategy. 2019. https://onstrategyhq.com
24. Probert K. Moving to the Future: Nutrition and Physical Activity Program Planning, Chapter 3: Develop 
a Plan—Chapter Overview. Tucson, AZ: Association of State Public Health Nutritionists; 2006. https://
movingtothefuture.org/chapter-3-develop-a-plan/develop-a-plan-chapter-overview
25. National Association of County and City Health Offi  cials. Mobilizing for Action Th rough Planning and 
Partnerships (MAPP). https://www.naccho.org/programs/public-health-infrastructure/performance
-improvement/community-health-assessment/mapp/phase-1-organize-for-success-partnership
-development
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation 
(CHANGE) Tool Action Steps. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change
-tool/action-steps.html


===PAGE 342===
 
12. Public Health Nutrition Program Planning 
317
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity. 
Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation (CHANGE) Tool: Action Step 7d: Complete the 
Community Health Improvement Planning Template. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state
-local-programs/change-tool/actionstep7.html
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity. 
Community Health Assessment and Group Evaluation (CHANGE) Tool: Action Step 8. 2019. https://www
.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/state-local-programs/change-tool/actionstep8.html
29. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 3 
Developing a Plan for Assessing Local Needs and Resources. 2018. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/
assessment/assessing-community-needs-and-resources/develop-a-plan/main
30. Hansen S, Kanning M, Lauer R, et al. MAP-IT: A practical tool for planning complex behavior 
modifi cation interventions. Health Promot Pract. 2017;18(5):696–705. doi:10.1177/1524839917710454
31. Aldridge WA, Boothroyd RI, Fleming WO, et al. Transforming community prevention systems 
for sustained impact: embedding active implementation and scaling functions. Transl Behav Med. 
2016;6(1):135–144. doi:10.1007/s13142-015-0351-y
32. Rural Health Information Hub, University of North Dakota. Rural Community Health Toolkit, Module 5: 
Planning for Sustainability. 2019. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/rural-toolkit/5/sustainability
-planning
33. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 
46, Section 1: Strategies for the Long-Term Sustainability of an Initiative: An Overview. 2019. https://ctb
.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/sustain/long-term-sustainability/overview/main
34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, Offi  ce on Smoking and Health, & Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and 
Obesity. Developing an Eff ective Evaluation Plan: Setting the Course for Eff ective Program Evaluation. 
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2011:1.
35. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 
6, Section 1: Developing a Plan for Communication. 2019. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/
participation/promoting-interest
36. NORC at the University of Chicago. Developing a Conceptual Framework to Assess the Sustainability of 
Community Coalitions Post-Federal Funding. (Literature Review). Washington DC: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation; 2011. https://aspe.hhs
.gov/system/fi les/pdf/76066/report.pdf
37. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Chapter 
3, Section 8: Identifying Community Assets and Resources. 2019. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents/
assessment/assessing-community-needs-and-resources/identify-community-assets/main
38. University of Kansas, Center for Community Health and Development. Community Tool Box: Toolkit 1: 
Creating and Maintaining Partnerships. 2019. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/creating-and-maintaining-partnerships
39. Kretzmann JP, McKnight JL. Building Communities from the Inside Out: A Path Toward Finding and 
Mobilizing a Community’s Assets. Evanston, IL: Institute for Policy Research; 1993:1–11.
40. Bolding D. Growing healthy communities, Howard county [PowerPoint slides] 2010. Unpublished 
manuscript; 2010.
41. Powell S, Adams B. Personal communication. September 2018.
42. Bolding D. City of Nashville Arkansas Growing Healthy Communities Final Report December, 2011. 
Unpublished manuscript; 2011.
43. Howard County Health Improvement Coalition. Eating Fresher in Howard County, Community First 
Wellness Grant Report January 1, 2017–December 31, 2017. Unpublished manuscript; 2018.
44. Nashville Growing Healthy Communities Committee. Nashville Growing Healthy Communities. 2019. 
http://nashvilleghc.com/about
45. Rural Health Information Hub. Review of the Evidence Base. 2018. https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/
toolkits/rural-toolkit/2/evidence-base
46. U.S. Department of Transportation. Safe routes to school programs. https://www.transportation.gov/
mission/health/Safe-Routes-to-School-Programs. Updated August 24, 2015.


===PAGE 344===
13
PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION 
INTERVENTIONS 
AND EVALUATION
JESSICA SOLDAVINI, CAITLIN HILDEBRAND, AND ALICE AMMERMAN
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand the critical role of evaluation in both the design and assessing the impact of 
interventions.
2. Recognize the importance of planning evaluation strategies early in the process of inter-
vention design that fi t the appropriate stage: formative, process, outcome, and impact.
3. Be aware of the potential for logic models to identify appropriate inputs and outcomes and 
to evaluate process and impact.
4. Understand the wide variety of current and emerging evaluation strategies for interven-
tions as diverse as policy and social media.
5. Appreciate the importance of interprofessional approaches to intervention implementa-
tion and evaluation.
INTRODUCTION
Program evaluation is a critical component of public health nutrition interventions. Without 
program evaluation, it is diffi  cult to know whether interventions are having the intended eff ects. 
Program evaluation can also be used to help improve public health nutrition interventions. Th is 
chapter describes strategies for evaluating public health nutrition interventions. A variety of types 
of evaluation (formative, process, outcome, and impact) and methods for collecting both qual-
itative and quantitative data are discussed. Evaluation frameworks are useful when evaluating 
public health nutrition interventions. Th is chapter provides an overview of two evaluation frame-
works commonly used in public health nutrition: the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) Framework for Program Evaluation and the RE-AIM framework. Program evaluation is 
important for all types of public health nutrition interventions, and this chapter describes meth-
ods that can be used for a variety of approaches.
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION OF FOOD AND NUTRITION 
INTERVENTIONS
Th is chapter complements earlier chapters regarding program and policy interventions by describ-
ing strategies for program evaluation. In this chapter, we defi ne intervention as any activity taken 


===PAGE 345===
320 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
to improve public health nutrition. Evaluation can help determine whether nutrition interven-
tions and programs are eff ective and to identify areas in need of improvement.1
Th ere is increasing focus on the science of implementation and dissemination as mechanisms 
to ensure that interventions are eff ective and effi  cient and that those programs and interventions 
achieving these goals are scaled up to benefi t the greatest number of people. Implementation 
research is a form of evaluating the degree to which an intervention fi ts within the context and can 
be very helpful in informing program or policy redesign to achieve greater impact. An example 
would be a public health department off ering nutrition education for low-income individuals 
with diabetes. To be eff ective, such a program would need to be accessible to and aff ordable for 
the target population, be culturally relevant, create an eff ective referral process, and ideally be part 
of reimbursable clinical service delivery.
The Difference Between Evaluation and Research
Before further discussing the specifi cs of evaluation methods, it is important to consider the dif-
ferences and similarities between evaluation and research in public health nutrition. It can some-
times be diffi  cult to distinguish whether something should be considered research or evaluation, 
and it is possible for a project to include both. One of the major diff erences between research and 
evaluation is the primary goal. In general, research aims to gain new information and produce 
generalizable knowledge through answering a question in a controlled environment while eval-
uation seeks to assess the eff ectiveness of an intervention in a real-world setting. Research and 
evaluation projects oft en use similar methods and strategies. Some community organizations and 
funders are more comfortable with the term “evaluation” as it implies, perhaps, a more practical 
and applied eff ort. At the same time, community partners should be reassured that evaluation is 
designed to improve programs and not to judge their implementers.
Types of Evaluation
Th ere are a variety of diff erent types of evaluations. Common types of evaluations used in public 
health nutrition program evaluation are described in the following.
Formative evaluation typically occurs during the development of a new intervention, modi-
fi cation of an existing intervention, or adaptation of an intervention to a new setting or popula-
tion. Needs assessments, which were discussed in Chapter 11, Community Assessments in Public 
Health Nutrition, are an example of formative evaluation. Formative evaluation helps to ensure 
that the intervention is appropriate and feasible before it is fully implemented. It is important to 
conduct a formative evaluation prior to implementing an intervention so that you can develop 
and implement an intervention that is likely to be successful and meet the needs of the population 
served.
Process evaluation determines if an intervention was implemented as intended. It can help 
you understand why and for whom an intervention did or did not have the intended outcomes. 
Key process evaluation components include reach, dose delivered, dose received, fi delity, imple-
mentation, recruitment, and context.2 Reach is typically measured as the proportion of the target 
audience participating in an intervention or intervention component. An attendance sheet from 
a nutrition class is an example of a commonly used way to measure reach. Dose delivered refers 
to how much of an intended intervention is actually delivered. An example is the number of 
lessons from a curriculum that were actually taught. Dose received refers to the extent to which 
participants receive and engage with intervention materials or components. Examples of ways 
to assess this include questionnaires or interviews with intervention participants. Fidelity refers 


===PAGE 346===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
321
to whether the intervention was implemented as planned. Common ways of assessing fi delity 
include fi delity checklists and observations. Implementation aims to understand the extent that 
the intervention was implemented and received by the target audience and is a composite score of 
reach, dose delivered, dose received, and fi delity. Assessing recruitment involves documenting the 
approaches used to recruit participants into the intervention. Th is component of process evalua-
tion can be helpful for understanding things such as whether and why certain types of individuals 
or organizations were more or less likely to participate. Context focuses on assessing aspects of 
the larger environment (social, political, and environmental) that may infl uence the intervention.
Outcome and impact evaluations help to understand whether an intervention was eff ective 
at creating change. Outcome evaluation measures the eff ects of the intervention on achieving 
a program’s outcome objectives. Impact evaluation assesses how eff ective the intervention is in 
achieving its ultimate goals.
Logic Models
Logic models are a useful tool for program planning and evaluation. Th ey can be helpful for 
depicting what your intervention will do and the expected results. Th ey illustrate the sequential 
relationships between your intervention activities and intended eff ects.1 Th ere are several varia-
tions of logic models; however, common elements include the following:
 
■
Inputs are the resources invested into the program. Examples of inputs include fund-
ing, staff  time, materials, and partners.
 
■
Activities are what the intervention does with the inputs. Examples of activities 
include developing resources, conducting workshops, providing training, and estab-
lishing partnerships.
 
■
Outputs are the direct results of the activities that are intended to lead to the interven-
tion’s outcomes. Examples of outputs include resources developed, number of work-
shops held, number of participants trained, and number of partnerships established.
 
■
Outcomes are the changes that your intervention expects to achieve. Outcomes 
may correspond to one or more levels of the Social-Ecological Model. Outcomes are 
oft en divided into short-term, medium-term, and long-term outcomes. Short-term 
outcomes are the more immediate outcomes of an intervention, such as changes in 
knowledge, skills, or attitudes. Examples of medium-term outcomes include behavioral 
changes and policy, systems, and environmental (PSE) changes. Long-term outcomes 
are the more distal outcomes of an intervention, an example being changes in health 
conditions or status.1
Logic models can help you determine what indicators to measure in your evaluation. Th e 
diff erent sections of a logic model correspond to the diff erent types of evaluation. Information 
gathered during formative evaluation can be used to refi ne the activities indicated in the pro-
gram logic model. Process evaluation focuses on tracking the outputs of the program logic model. 
Outcome evaluation focuses on assessing the short- and intermediate-term outcomes section of 
the program logic model. Impact evaluation assesses the long-term outcomes of the logic model.
Evaluating Multiple Levels of the Social-Ecological Model
Intervention implementation can happen at many diff erent levels of the Social-Ecological Model. 
Traditionally, the focus of nutrition education programing has been targeted at the individual or 
group level. Increasingly, however, interventions are aimed at PSE change, moving upstream to 


===PAGE 347===
322 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
create environments that make the “healthy choice the easy choice.” Th is could include communi-
ty-level organizational change in schools or worksites or move further upstream to changes in the 
built environment (urban gardens, increased availability of healthy foods in parks and recreation 
areas) or policy (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program [SNAP], Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children [WIC], and Child Nutrition Programs).
Evaluation strategies vary by level of the Social-Ecological model. Most people are familiar 
with individual-level strategies. Generally, data are collected before and aft er an intervention to 
determine if there has been a change. Ideally, this would involve a control or comparison group 
so that any conclusion about impact could rule out the potential for change due to chance or 
to “secular trend.” For example, if an evaluation study is addressing an intervention to increase 
the intake of folic acid and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announces the need to 
include folic acid levels on nutrition labels, this could infl uence dietary change above and beyond 
any impact of the intervention. Individual-level measures could be clinically focused (body mass 
index [BMI], blood pressure, hemoglobin A1c, etc.) or address diet-related behaviors. Other indi-
vidual-level evaluation involves assessment of knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs. Th e constructs 
from the behavior theories your intervention is based on can help to select what to measure in 
your evaluation. Th is can involve both qualitative and quantitative assessment using structured/
semistructured interviews, focus groups, or surveys. Qualitative measures are more commonly 
used for formative assessment prior to intervention implementation or aft er it is complete, in 
order to better understand how to design and conduct an intervention, based on the population 
served. To quantify intervention impact, surveys and structured observation are more appro-
priate, recognizing that any sort of self-report measure involves subjectivity. Care must be taken 
to ensure respondents that there are no “right answers” and their responses are most helpful to 
improving nutrition for all if candid and accurate.
At other levels of the Social-Ecological Model, evaluation can involve a wide variety of measure-
ment strategies, from tracking changes in monitoring data to media coverage and policy processes. 
A helpful tool to identify both variables and measurement instruments is the SNAP-Ed Evaluation 
Framework.3 Th is framework divides the Social-Ecological Model into individual, environmental 
settings, and sectors of infl uence, which parallel the Social-Ecological model, and is organized in 
a logic model format. Th e interactive framework off ers specifi c variables to be measured and, in 
many cases, validated measurement instruments. With the increasing interest in “food systems” 
change as an approach to public health nutrition, this framework can be a helpful guide in evaluat-
ing, for example, the impact of community gardens from the individual level (taste preferences for 
vegetables, knowledge about cooking, etc.) to sectors of infl uence (food policy council formation 
and impact, zoning policies regarding community gardens, “brown fi eld” regulations, and funding 
to address contaminated soil for urban gardens, etc.). In the case of policy, short-term outcomes 
might include forming a coalition, medium-term outcomes could be achieving the legislative 
action of passing a bill or regulation, and long-term outcomes would include whether the bill was 
implemented as planned and its impact on the original concern. An example would be forming a 
coalition around creating a walking trail to increase physical activity, infl uencing the city council 
to designate land for the trail, documenting if the trail is built as specifi ed, and assessing whether it 
results in increased physical activity of individuals in the community.
Data Collection Methods
As previously discussed, both quantitative and qualitative data collection methods can be used. It 
is common to use a mixed methods approach that collects both quantitative and qualitative data. 


===PAGE 348===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
323
Triangulation of data refers to using multiple data sources to evaluate an outcome,4 which helps to 
verify the results of the diff erent methods and provide more credibility to the results.
Questionnaires are commonly used to assess outcomes and can assess quantitative and/or 
qualitative outcomes as they may contain closed and/or open-ended questions. Th ey can be used 
to collect data on a variety of topics including outcomes such as dietary intake, physical activity, 
and feedback on an intervention. New questionnaires do not need to be developed for every 
intervention. It can be helpful to select tools that have been shown to be valid and reliable in sim-
ilar populations. A pretest–posttest design is oft en used where questionnaires are administered 
before and aft er an intervention in order to assess change. Some interventions only administer 
questionnaires at the end of an intervention. A useful tool for evaluating change over time when 
you are only administering a questionnaire at the end of an intervention is a retrospective pre–
post survey, which collects information on outcomes before and aft er an intervention at the same 
time. Th is method can be useful when it is not feasible to administer both pre- and postsurveys, 
such as when giving a one-session nutrition lesson. Questionnaires may be administered through 
a variety of modes including pencil and paper (in person or by mail), telephone, or online.
Focus groups and structured interviews are commonly used methods to collect qualitative 
data. Similar information can be collected through these methods, and the choice of which to 
use depends on a variety of factors. Focus groups allow you to collect information from more 
individuals at one time; however, if individuals are not all able to participate in the same place 
at the same time, interviews may be a better option. Focus groups are helpful when interactions 
among the participants can be helpful. If you are discussing a sensitive topic that participants 
may not be comfortable discussing with others, have respondents with diff erent characteristics, 
or have a large amount of materials for participants to review, interviews may be a more appro-
priate option for data collection.
Photovoice is a type of participatory action research in which participants use photographs 
to capture and refl ect on diff erent issues.5,6 Participants help to identify themes for the project 
to focus on and take pictures related to those themes using a prompt selected by the group, like 
“What helps me be healthy and what gets in the way?” Th ey then gather for group discussions 
to refl ect on those images and the issues they represent. Discussions are oft en guided by the 
SHOWeD method, which guides participants through a series of questions to help them refl ect 
on the photos.6 Th e questions include:
 
■
What do you See here?
 
■
What is really Happening here?
 
■
How does this relate to Our lives?
 
■
Why does this situation, concern, or strength exist?
 
■
What can we Do about it?
One of the potential goals of photovoice is to reach policy-makers or others who can infl uence 
change.5,6 Photos and stories resulting from the project can be shared with community leaders and 
policy-makers through a variety of ways, including community forums or presentations, exhibits, 
and community locations, such as libraries, schools, parks and recreation facilities, or town halls. 
Th ey can also be shared online through websites or social media as well as through traditional 
media coverage or publications.
Not all data used in program evaluation need to be new data collected specifi cally for this 
purpose. For example, administrative data can be used, such as data collected by school meals 
programs on the number of meals served to assess the eff ect of an intervention on increasing 


===PAGE 349===
324 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
participation in school meals programs. Depending on the target population of your interven-
tion, you may be able to use national, state, or local data from surveillance systems to help 
assess change in outcomes such as dietary behaviors or physical activity over time. Th is is use-
ful when your intervention is focused on community-level change. Th e Behavioral Risk Factor 
Surveillance System is an example of a survey developed and administered by the CDC that 
collects data across the United States and is able to provide state-level estimates as well as local-
level estimates in some cases.7
A variety of observational methods can be used to collect quantitative or qualitative data. 
Examples of observational methods in process evaluation include observers completing fi del-
ity checklists while observing intervention activities to determine whether the planned compo-
nents occurred. Observers can also assess participant engagement. Additionally, observational 
methods can be used as part of outcome and impact evaluation. Many public health nutrition 
interventions are interested in assessing changes in dietary behaviors. While many evaluations 
rely on self-reported information, observational methods also exist. Observational methods 
of collecting dietary intake are oft en used with interventions in school or childcare settings to 
assess changes in what children eat in meals served in these settings. Young children oft en have 
diffi  culty accurately recalling what they ate, limiting the value of self-reported methods for this 
population. Observational methods for collecting dietary data typically involve observing meal 
trays and/or children eating and subtracting how much food was left  at the end from how much 
they were served.8,9 Observers may also watch the children while they eat to determine if they 
dropped, spilled, traded, or were provided with extra portions. As an alternative to estimating 
the amount consumed through observation, the food items served can be weighed before and 
aft er a meal (plate waste monitoring) to determine how much was wasted and how much was 
eaten.10,11 Limitations of these methods include being time-consuming and only being able to 
observe specifi c meals where it is possible to make observations as opposed to overall dietary 
intake. Observational methods are also used in PSE change interventions and can be used to 
determine if changes are being implemented. An intervention to increase the amount of fruits and 
vegetables sold in corner stores may have observers report information such as the type, amount, 
price, and quality of fruits and vegetables sold in the store, for example. Sometimes this is referred 
to as “disappearance data” when the amount of food remaining on the shelf is subtracted from 
what is originally stocked.
EVALUATION METHODS AND BEST PRACTICES
Given that evaluation can serve various purposes, the process can take many forms. Approaching 
evaluation through a systematic and methodical approach allows for both comprehensive learn-
ing and focused eff orts, depending on the needs of the evaluation participants and audience.1
Guiding Frameworks for Evaluation
Th e product of an evaluation has the potential for considerable utility for programs and stake-
holders. In addition, conducting an evaluation requires valuable time and resources. Th us, 
approaching an evaluation through the lens of a comprehensive framework allows for greater 
effi  ciency while securing useful results. Several frameworks have been developed as a guide for 
public health practitioners. Th is section provides an overview of the general approach to program 
evaluation using the CDC Framework for Program Evaluation in Public Health1 and RE-AIM 
framework.12


===PAGE 350===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
325
The CDC Framework for Program Evaluation in Public Health
Th e CDC Framework for Program Evaluation in Public Health outlines steps and standards to 
guide the performance of an evaluation.1 It is designed as a practical tool that can be used not only 
for looking at program outcomes but also for incorporating evaluative processes into everyday 
organizational practices. Th e framework considers contextual factors of a program to allow for 
more tailored and thus impactful evaluation strategies from the start. Th e framework’s design 
allows for its use in a variety of applications and settings, from specifi c program operations and 
public health research to policy-level changes. Remember that planning your evaluation should 
be a focus of activity from the very beginning of program or policy implementation. Th e steps 
outlined in the CDC evaluation framework1 are as follows:
STEP 1: ENGAGE STAKEHOLDERS
Stakeholders, which are individuals and organizations with an interest in what will be learned 
from the evaluation, are important to engage from the beginning in order to ensure the evaluation 
meets their needs. Stakeholders may include the individuals who are involved with implementing 
the intervention, served by the intervention, or identifi ed as primary users of the evaluation.
STEP 2: DESCRIBE THE PROGRAM
Th e program description is a critical step in the evaluation process as it provides a framework to 
guide decision-making in future steps of the evaluation process. Items to include in the program 
description are need, expected eff ects, activities, resources, stage of development, and context. A 
logic model can help illustrate the interrelationship of these components.
STEP 3: FOCUS THE EVALUATION DESIGN
It is important to focus the evaluation design to ensure that the issues that are most important 
to the stakeholders are being addressed and that time and resources are being used effi  ciently. 
To focus the evaluation design, start by determining the purpose of the evaluation, which may 
include gaining insight, changing practices, assessing eff ects, or impacting participants. Th e users 
of your evaluation fi ndings and how they will use them should be defi ned. Th ese components 
will then help you to select your evaluation questions and the methods you will use to gather the 
information needed. Agreements may be developed related to the evaluation plan that addresses 
areas such as how it will be implemented, who will implement it, and how ethical standards will 
be maintained.
STEP 4: GATHER CREDIBLE EVIDENCE
Information gathered during the evaluation needs to be credible. It is helpful to use the logic model 
to select which indicators to measure. Th e sources of data you use and the quality and quantity of 
data infl uence how credible your fi ndings will be. Logistics are important to keep in mind when 
gathering evidence, as the most appropriate techniques can vary based on factors such as timing, 
physical infrastructure, and techniques used. It is also important to take the cultural norms of 
individuals and organizations into consideration when determining methods of gathering data.
STEP 5: JUSTIFY CONCLUSIONS
Justifying conclusions is an important step because it promotes increased stakeholder trust in 
the outcomes of the evaluation, thus enhancing the potential utility of the evaluation results 


===PAGE 351===
326 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
for stakeholders. Stakeholder values guide the standards for justifying conclusions from an 
evaluation and provide a measure for judging program efficacy. Analysis and synthesis of 
evidence have the potential to reveal patterns from evaluation results that may be helpful 
for drawing conclusions. Results gained through evaluation require further interpretation 
to gain meaningful conclusions, ideally through incorporating stakeholder input. Within an 
evaluation, judgments reflect the merit or significance of the program and require assessing 
how results compare to specifically chosen standards, such as program objectives or partici-
pant needs. Finally, the resulting recommendations from an evaluation should consider not 
only the evidence gathered and resulting conclusions but also stakeholder input and context. 
Presenting recommendations with multiple options to consider may prove more useful for 
stakeholders.
STEP 6: ENSURE USE AND SHARE LESSONS LEARNED
Th e fi nal component of the CDC Evaluation Framework entails strategies to improve imple-
mentation and dissemination of evaluation results. Factors such as the design of the evaluation, 
preparation of stakeholders for using the fi ndings, and obtainment of continuous feedback are 
important. Engaging in follow-up aft er the conclusion of an evaluation is a way to provide pro-
grams with support and promote appropriate application of fi ndings. Finally, evaluators should 
work with stakeholders to consider how best to disseminate the results of the evaluation as well 
as “lessons learned.”
The RE-AIM Framework
Th e growing fi eld of implementation science examines how to best put knowledge from evi-
dence-based studies into practice.13 Several factors may impact implementation of evidence-based 
studies.13 For example, barriers to implementation may include cost or lack of population rep-
resentativeness.13,14 Potential strategies to improve implementation of evidence-based studies 
include greater attention given to external validity and increased involvement of stakeholders;2 
taking these measures may help make the intervention more relevant for users.13
Th e RE-AIM framework is an example of a framework used in dissemination and implemen-
tation science and is an attempt to shift  the focus of evaluation away from simply the eff ect or 
outcome and capture other important elements of program and policy impact. For example, if the 
target population is not reached (commonly interventions end up “preaching to the choir” rather 
than reaching those in greatest need), even a very eff ective intervention will not have the impact 
desired. Similarly, if the intervention eff ect only occurs during the brief period of evaluation and 
is not maintained over time, it off ers little value in the long run. RE-AIM consists of fi ve dimen-
sions to consider in evaluation: reach, effi  cacy, adoption, implementation, and maintenance.12 
Th ese fi ve dimensions are also considered the “fi ve steps to translate research into action” and are 
defi ned as follows:15
1. 
Reach refers to the absolute number or proportion of the target audience and the rep-
resentativeness of participants in an intervention compared with the target audience.
2. 
Eff ectiveness/effi  cacy considers the outcomes of an intervention and should take into 
account both positive and negative eff ects.
3. 
Adoption refers to the absolute number of settings or staff  who are willing to imple-
ment a program as well as the proportion and representativeness.


===PAGE 352===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
327
4. 
Implementation looks at whether an intervention was carried out as planned and 
resources expended to deliver the intervention.
5. 
Maintenance occurs at both the individual and organizational levels. Maintenance 
at the individual level refers to the long-term outcomes 6 months or longer aft er an 
intervention. Maintenance at the organizational level looks at the degree of uptake of a 
policy or program.
HEALTHY FOOD ENVIRONMENTS (HFE) PRICING INITIATIVE INTERVENTION EXAMPLE
Th e HFE Initiative, implemented by the organization NC Prevention Partners, was an interven-
tion targeting both the policy and environmental levels to promote healthy eating behaviors in the 
hospital setting throughout North Carolina with later expansion to South Carolina.16 Th e inter-
vention aimed to encourage healthier eating behaviors by hospital visitors, staff , and volunteers by 
making healthy food options more accessible and visible. Specifi cally, the initiative used a pricing 
model to incentivize healthier eating through price discounts on healthy foods while simultane-
ously charging more for unhealthy foods. In addition, the intervention incorporated strategies to 
educate consumers at the point of purchase with healthy food labels. HFE included changes not 
only in cafeterias but also in vending machines and catering. Th e fi ve underlying principles of the 
HFE Initiative are:
 
■
Provide access to healthy foods: achieved through actions such as incorporation of 
dietary guidelines and working with vendors to procure healthier foods.
 
■
Use pricing to promote healthy foods: achieved through pricing incentives that 
encourage the purchase of healthier foods and discourage the purchase of less 
health-promoting foods.
 
■
Use marketing techniques to promote healthy foods: achieved through point-of-sale 
strategies such as healthy food icon labels and product placement to encourage pur-
chasing healthier items.
 
■
Use benefi t design and incentives to encourage behavior change: achieved through 
implementing programs such as those targeting hospital employee wellness.
 
■
Educate staff  and visitors about healthy foods: achieved through initiatives such as 
healthy food choice education and training and hosting cooking demonstrations.16
Th e evaluation for the program was based on the RE-AIM framework. Figure 13.1 shows the 
logic model for the intervention and Exhibit 13.1 shows the evaluation plan as depicted on 
the website for the Center for Training and Research Translation (Center TRT).16 Center TRT 
developed a framework for evaluating PSE change interventions and identifi es, reviews, trans-
lates, and disseminates evidence-based interventions that promote healthy eating and physical 
activity.17–19
INVENTION AND REINVENTION OF APPROACHES BASED 
ON HEALTH OUTCOMES
Although evaluation is oft en seen as the fi nal step in the intervention process, it is much more 
productive (and fun/useful) to see it as a process of invention and reinvention. Any good inno-
vator/entrepreneur knows that “failure” is part of the learning process and is expected to happen 


===PAGE 353===
328 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
FIGURE 13.1 Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative logic model.
Center TRT, Center for Training and Research Translation.
Source: Center for Training and Research Translation. From Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative. http://www
.centertrt.org/?p=intervention&id=1099
 
Logic model for Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative
Center TRT, UNC-HPDP
Posted May 2013
CENTER TRT LOGIC MODEL 
Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative
 
 
Intermediate  
(4-6 years) 
 
Reduced caloric 
intake (lower 
consumption of 
unhealthy 
foods)  among 
customers 
 
 
Unintended 
consequences 
Fewer 
customers 
Decreased 
sales 
Decreased 
customer/ 
personnel 
satisfaction 
 
Inputs  
Problems 
Obesity data 
Lack of access/ 
availability of 
healthy food 
options 
High 
consumption of 
unhealthy food 
items 
Solutions 
Provide access to 
healthy foods  
Use pricing to 
promote healthy 
foods 
Use marketing 
techniques  to 
promote healthy 
foods 
Use benefit 
design & 
incentives to 
encourage 
behavior change 
Educate staff and 
visitors about 
healthy foods 
Politics/ 
Stakeholders 
Executive 
team/senior 
administration 
Food service staff
 
 
Dietitians 
Marketing/ 
communications 
staff 
Worksite 
wellness staff 
Food vendors 
Employees/ 
Customers 
Other 
USDA Dietary 
Guidelines 
Formative 
research –
employee focus 
groups 
 Initial assessment 
of food 
environment* 
Outcomes/Effectiveness
 
Results or changes for individuals, groups, 
organizations, communities, or systems
 
 
 
Short Term 
(1-3 years) 
 
Increased 
accessibility/ 
availability of 
healthy food 
items 
 
Increased sales of 
healthy food 
items 
 
Decreased sales 
of unhealthy food 
items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long Term 
(7-9 years) 
 
Public Health  
Impact 
 
Effective in 
achieving 
population level 
improvements in 
health and well-
being 
 
Equitable 
distribution of 
improvements 
across 
population 
subgroups, 
particularly 
those at greatest 
risk 
 
Cost Effective 
in achieving 
improvements  
Activities 
Throughout process
Engage and  
communicate with 
stakeholders 
Continually 
promote/market 
healthy food items  
2. Implementation
 Assemble wellness 
team responsible for 
implementation 
 Develop an action 
plan 
 Partner with 
contracted food 
services and vendors 
who will meet 
procurement 
specifications  
Train food service 
personnel 
Create equitable 
access across all 
work shifts (e.g. 
ensure healthy 
options in vending 
machines) 
 Post nutrition 
information at point 
of selection and 
reposition healthy 
and unhealthy items 
in store 
Outputs 
Throughout process
 # of marketing & 
communication 
materials 
distributed 
 Stakeholders 
engaged 
 Institutionalized 
policies and 
procedures that 
increase access to 
and availability of 
healthy food items 
 Nutrition 
guidelines/ criteria 
adopted 
Reach
# and 
demographics of 
customers reached 
by initiative 
Adoption 
# of hospitals/
potential 
Implementation 
# of contracts with 
vendors who will 
meet specifications 
# of food service 
personnel trained 
Pricing incentives 
acceptable to 
customers 
Revenue neutral 
Pricing incentives 
and placement of 
items feasible to 
implement 
Healthy food
options in vending
machines  
 
3. Maintenance/ 
Modification 
 Institutionalize 
changes (policies, 
procedures, etc.)
 
Monitor sales  
Conduct follow-up 
assessments with 
food service 
personnel and 
customers 
Assess food 
environment at
specified intervals
  
1. Formulation 
Prioritize availability 
and affordability of 
healthy food items
Identify healthy food 
guidelines/criteria 
Determine pricing 
points and develop 
pricing plan 
 
*North Carolina Prevention Partners (NCPP) developed 
WorkHealthy America, an online tool that inventories 
policies, environments, benefits, pricing, marketing/
 
labeling, and educational efforts to provide feedback to 
worksites about their current practices. There is a cost to  
use the tool and details can be found on the NCPP website.  
 
An alternative to using the NCPP tool is to develop your 
own tool to assess the food environment
 
Maintenance 
Infrastructure and 
systems to support 
pricing incentives 
Maintain sales
On-going 
marketing  
Stakeholders
engaged through 
regular 
communications 
Enactment
Commitment  to 
intervention 
Final intervention 
plan 
Potential Outcome Data Sources:
 
Cash register sales data
 
Employee survey
 
Customer survey 
Worksite demographic data
 
Assessment of food environment*
Potential Process Data Sources:
 
Program trackers—trainings conducted, food item assessment log (i.e.  
keeping track of what items meet established guidelines), materials 
 
development and distribution log, marketing/communications log, 
stakeholder communications log.
 
 Employee survey
 
 Customer survey 
 Worksite demographic data
 
 Assessment of food environment*
 


===PAGE 354===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
329
EXHIBIT 13.1
HEALTHY FOOD ENVIRONMENTS PRICING INITIATIVE EVALUATION MODEL
CENTER TRT EVALUATION PLAN
Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative
Purpose: The purpose of this evaluation plan is to determine the extent of implementation, accept-
ability, and effectiveness of a Healthy Food Environments (HFE) Pricing Initiative similar to the North 
Carolina Prevention Partner’s HFE Pricing Initiative. This evaluation plan provides a menu of options 
for evaluation questions covering several dimensions commonly included in program evaluations, 
including: reach, adoption, extent of program implementation, and effectiveness in addressing tar-
geted outcomes. Please note that this suggested evaluation plan focuses on program implementation; 
a list of other relevant evaluation questions is available in the Evaluation section of the Center TRT 
website. 
Evaluation questions: This evaluation plan likely includes many more evaluation questions than will be 
feasible to answer. Similarly, it may include questions that are less important for your particular context 
or lack questions that should be prioritized for your context. Center TRT recommends working with your 
stakeholder group to prioritize the evaluation questions you will seek to answer. 
Design: The evaluation is a pre- and post-test design with no comparison group. 
Data collection: A variety of data collection tools are referenced throughout the evaluation plan. These 
data collection tools will need to be created to apply to your context. These same tools also appear in 
the lower section of the Center TRT Logic Model. 
Process evaluation tools: 
• Program trackers – These are logs used to monitor various aspects of program reach, adoption, and 
implementation. The wellness team and food service personnel would probably maintain such logs. 
The program trackers we suggest keeping are: trainings conducted, food item assessment log (i.e. 
keeping track of what items meet established guidelines), materials development and distribution log, 
marketing/communications log, stakeholder communications log, etc. 
• Cash register sales data 
• Employee survey 
• Customer survey 
• Worksite demographic data 
• Assessment of food environment* (either the NCPP tool or tool created for your context)
Short-term (1-3 year) outcome evaluation tools:
• Cash register sales data 
• Assessment of food environment* (either the NCPP tool or tool created for your context)
*North Carolina Prevention Partners developed WorkHealthy America, an online tool that invento-
ries policies, environments, benefi ts, pricing, marketing/labeling, and educational efforts to provide 
feedback to worksites about their current practices. There is a cost to use the tool and details can 
be found on the NCPP website. An alternative to using the NCPP tool is to develop your own 
tool to assess the food environment. All other tools will need to be developed to apply to your 
context. 
Contact information for the developers is available on the Center TRT website within the HFE Pricing 
Initiative intervention package. Please contact the intervention developers for questions about the inter-
vention itself.
(continued)


===PAGE 355===
330 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
PROCESS EVALUATION
This section should address the reach of the intervention into the intended population; the adoption or 
uptake of the intervention by setting; and the fi delity of implementation of the intervention components 
and core elements.
Evaluation Questions
Data to Be Collected
Data Collection Method
Reach
How many people were exposed to 
the pricing initiative?
What were the demographics of 
customers purchasing food from the 
hospitals?
Number of customers per day
Demographics (age, gender, etc.) 
of customers at hospitals
• Cash register sales data
• Customer demographic 
data and/or customer 
survey
Adoption
What proportion of hospitals adopted 
the pricing initiative?
What are the characteristics of the hos-
pitals adopting the pricing initiative?
Percentage of hospitals that adopt 
the pricing initiative out of the 
total number that could adopt
Size (number of beds), public/
private, specialties, setting (urban/
rural)
• Program tracker—hos-
pital adoption log
• Program tracker—hos-
pital adoption log
Implementation
What nutrition guidelines/criteria were 
identifi ed? 
What pricing points were developed?
Who was on the wellness team 
assembled?
How many and what type of contracts 
were established with vendors who will 
meet specifi cations?
How many food service personnel 
were trained and what was the content 
of the training?
Were pricing incentives acceptable to 
customers?
Were pricing initiatives feasible for 
personnel to implement?
Was the program revenue neutral?
Did hospitals fully implement the 
pricing initiative, including:
• Labeling healthy food items
• Posting nutrition information at 
point of selection
• Place less healthy food items in 
lower traffi c areas and healthy food 
items in higher traffi c areas
• Adjust pricing points to encourage 
consumption of healthier food 
items and discourage consumption 
of less healthy food items
Nutrition guidelines/criteria
Pricing points
Existence and composition of 
wellness team
Number and what type of 
contracts
Number of food service personnel 
trained Training content
Acceptability of incentives
Feasibility of implementation
Budget records (purchases and 
sales)
Number of hospitals that fully 
implemented the pricing initiative, 
including:
• Labeling healthy food items
• Posting nutrition information at 
point of selection
• Place less healthy food items in 
lower traffi c areas and healthy 
food items in higher traffi c areas
• Adjust pricing points to encour-
age consumption of healthier 
food items and discourage 
consumption of less healthy 
food items
• Program tracker—
Materials development 
log
• Program tracker—
Planning log or 
Materials development 
log
• Program tracker—
Planning log
• Cash register sales data
• Program tracker—train-
ing log
• Training curriculum and 
agenda
• Customer survey
• Employee survey
• Cash register sales data
• Program tracker—
implementation log or 
hospital adoption log
(continued)
EXHIBIT 13.1
HEALTHY FOOD ENVIRONMENTS PRICING INITIATIVE EVALUATION MODEL 
(CONTINUED)


===PAGE 356===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
331
OUTCOME EVALUATION
This section should address the effect of the intervention on the intended short-term outcomes (those 
you can measure at the end of a 1–3-year project period).
Evaluation Questions
Data to Be Collected
Data Collection Method
Short-Term Outcomes
Outcome 1: Increased accessibility/availability of healthy food items
Did access to healthy food items at 
hospitals increase?
Number of “healthy” (use identi-
fi ed nutrition guidelines/criteria) 
food items available at each 
hospital: 
• Baseline
• Follow-up
• Cash register sales 
data
• Assessment of food 
environment (either 
NCPP tool or tool cre-
ated for your context)
Outcome 2: Increased sales of healthy food items
Did sales of healthy food items 
increase?
“Healthy” (use identifi ed nutrition 
guidelines/criteria) food item 
sales:
• Baseline
• Follow-up
• Cash register sales 
data
Outcome 3: Decreased sales of unhealthy food items
Did sales of unhealthy food items 
decrease?
“Unhealthy” (use identifi ed 
nutrition guidelines/criteria) food 
item sales:
• Baseline
• Follow-up
• Cash register sales 
data
Center TRT, Center for Training and Research Translation.
Source: From Center for Training and Research Translation. Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative. 
http://www.centertrt.org/?p=intervention&id=1099
some if not much of the time. Continuing with this theme, oft en product testing results in “piv-
oting” to a diff erent approach that is more likely to be satisfactory to the customer. Th is same 
approach can apply to public health nutrition interventions. Despite careful formative evalua-
tion work, there is always the potential that an intervention may fail to have the desired impact. 
Collecting good process data using implementation theory frameworks, such as RE-AIM or the 
Consolidated Framework for Implementation Science,20 will help enormously in understanding 
what might have gone wrong and what might be corrected or “reinvented.”
For example, we have plenty of evidence that a healthier diet for children (more whole grains, 
more fruits and vegetables, higher quality fats and oils, and fewer simple carbohydrates) is asso-
ciated with better long-term outcomes. It seems obvious that school lunches should implement 
these guidelines given the large potential for impact nationally. However, implementation of the 
policy has been rocky due to unexpected resistance from school lunch program leaders and staff , 
EXHIBIT 13.1
HEALTHY FOOD ENVIRONMENTS PRICING INITIATIVE EVALUATION MODEL 
(CONTINUED)


===PAGE 357===
332 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
in part because they felt they were not adequately consulted regarding the implementation process. 
Th ere were also logistical challenges, such as the unappealing consistency of whole-grain pasta 
products kept hot on the lunch line and limited knowledge about vegetable preparation among 
school cafeteria staff . However, rather than “ditching” the idea of the cafeteria guidelines in the 
Healthy Hunger-Free Kids Act, various evaluations have demonstrated that serving practices can 
be modifi ed and that staff /children adjust to the new foods and preparation strategies over time.
COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES
As you have seen in other chapters, health communications can play an important role in 
improving health outcomes, and evaluation is key to identifying the most eff ective and effi  cient 
approaches. Health communication strategies can be used to reach a variety of audiences includ-
ing community members, health professionals, and policy-makers.
Examples of Communication Channels
A variety of communication channels can be used to disseminate health messages. Th e specifi c 
channels you use depend on a variety of factors, including who is the intended audience you are 
trying to reach and what is the message you are trying to deliver. Interpersonal channels, such as a 
healthcare provider sharing information with a patient, are oft en used to convey health messages. 
Telehealth strategies, such as videoconferencing, can be used to share health messages over long 
distances. Print materials, such as posters, brochures, and newsletters, are commonly used to 
distribute health information. Promotional items with health messages can also be distributed. 
Water bottles with a message about drinking water are a great way to promote drinking water 
instead of sugary drinks, for example. Mass media, such as radio, television, newspapers, bill-
boards, bus advertisements, and direct mailings are also oft en used. In addition, online channels, 
such as websites and social media, are very popular. Th e wide variety of communication channels 
requires a diverse set of evaluation strategies.
Development and Evaluation of Health Communication Programs
Successful health communication programs involve thoughtful planning and evaluation. Th e four 
stages of developing a health communication program are planning and strategy development; 
developing and pretesting concepts, messages, and materials; implementing the program; and 
assessing eff ectiveness and making refi nements.21 Th is is a circular process, and evaluation plays 
an important role in each stage.
Stage 1: Planning and Strategy Development
Approaches to evaluation should be considered and implemented throughout the planning 
process. During the fi rst stage, you will conduct formative evaluation. Begin by assessing 
the health issue/problem and identifying all components of a possible solution. Data should 
be gathered and reviewed on the health issue/problem, who is aff ected, and possible causes 
and solutions. In this step, it is important to evaluate all possible components of a solu-
tion and whether health communication is an appropriate strategy alone or in combination 
with other approaches. During this stage, you will also develop communication objectives. 
Communication objectives should be SMART (specifi c, measurable, achievable, relevant, and 


===PAGE 358===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
333
time-bound), which helps in building in an evaluation component. Th is stage also involves 
defi ning and learning about the intended audience(s) of the communication program; think-
ing about the settings, channels, and activities that the communication program will use to 
reach the intended audience; and identifying potential partners to work with on the commu-
nication program. Th e fi nal step of stage 1 is to develop a communication strategy and draft  
communication and evaluation plans.
Stage 2: Developing and Pretesting Concepts, Messages, and Materials
Before beginning to develop new materials, it is important to identify and evaluate existing mate-
rials to see whether there is a need to create something new. Using or adapting existing materials 
can help to save time and money and prevent you from having to “reinvent the wheel.”
Next, you will develop message concepts, which are rough forms of how you will present the 
information, and test them with the intended audience. Concept testing is important because it 
can help to assess reactions to your proposed messages and materials and to identify which mes-
sages will work best for the intended audiences. Th e information gathered can be used to help 
refi ne your messages and materials prior to producing them. Focus groups and in-depth inter-
views are common strategies for testing concepts. Cognitive response testing is another method 
that can be used and allows you to understand how members of your target audience interpret 
and comprehend your messages. Individuals are shown the messages and complete a semistruc-
tured interview answering questions related to areas such as how they interpret or perceive cer-
tain words or phrases.22 Th ey are also able to provide suggestions on diff erent ways of wording 
messages to make them easier to understand and to increase the relevance of the information.22
Aft er testing message concepts, you will decide what materials to develop. Materials should be 
pretested with the intended audience to ensure they understand the message, are relevant, and 
are doing what you want them to do. A variety of strategies are used to pretest materials, such as 
questionnaires, theater testing of large groups of individuals who respond to messages, and obser-
vational studies in which materials are put out and the behaviors of individuals are observed.
Stage 3: Implementing the Program
Process evaluation is an important component of implementing a health communication pro-
gram and helps to assess whether the program was implemented as intended. Areas assessed 
during process evaluation include who was reached; what was done; when, where, and how activ-
ities were carried out; and audience satisfaction. Examples of methods to collect process data 
include activity tracking sheets, website or social media metrics, and status reports and/or meet-
ings with staff  and partners. Surveys can be conducted with your audience to help assess areas 
such as audience satisfaction, how well the characteristics of those reached match those of your 
intended audience, and how the materials were used. Intercept surveys are commonly used in 
evaluating communication campaigns. With this method, interviewers go to a public location or 
business to recruit, screen, and interview individuals who are at that location. Th ese interviews 
are typically short as individuals are interviewed as they are recruited and will not have planned 
to be participating in advance. Intercept surveys have the benefi ts of being able to quickly collect 
data at a low cost; however, there are limitations, such as not having a representative sample 
as only individuals at the location and time of data collection are able to participate. Intercept 
surveys can also be conducted online, such as a brief survey popping up when someone visits a 
website. Th e data collected through process evaluation should be reviewed regularly to determine 
whether adjustments should be made.


===PAGE 359===
334 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
Stage 4: Assessing Effectiveness and Making Refi nements
In developing an outcome evaluation, determine what information you need to obtain from the 
evaluation and the type of data you will need to collect. Th ere are a variety of types of outcomes 
you may want to consider, including changes in knowledge, attitudes, or behaviors; awareness of 
the health communication program; or whether policies or institutional actions were taken. Next, 
you will determine which type of evaluation design you will use. Th e data collection instruments 
will then be developed and pretested. Both quantitative and qualitative methods can be used. 
Data collection will then take place. Ideally, data collection takes place both before and aft er the 
program so that you can assess change. Analyze your data and use it to develop an evaluation 
report that can be shared with key stakeholders. Th e results of the evaluation can be used to refi ne 
the health communication program.
Social Media
Much of what was discussed before applies to evaluating social media campaigns as well. In this sec-
tion, we discuss metrics relevant to social media. As with the evaluation of most other types of public 
health nutrition programs, reach is oft en an important process measure to consider. In the context 
of social media, reach typically refers to the number of unique individuals who had the opportunity 
to see your content.23 Th is diff ers from impressions, which is the number of times a piece of content 
has been viewed. Many social media platforms provide metrics for reach and/or impressions.23 Th ey 
may also provide information on the demographics of the individuals you reached. Depending on 
the platform, other ways of assessing these include number of likes, followers, views, subscribers, or 
visitors. Engagement refers to taking some type of action beyond exposure.23 Examples of ways to 
measure this include number of likes, comments, retweets, content embeds, replies, shares, hashtag 
use, and votes. Posts, comments, or other pieces of content can also be qualitatively analyzed to assess 
outcomes, such as whether engagement with your campaign is positive, neutral, or negative in senti-
ment. You can also survey individuals to assess outcomes of interest through social media platforms.
Telehealth
With telehealth interventions becoming increasingly used, it is important that they are evaluated. As 
with any public health nutrition intervention, evaluation planning should begin while the interven-
tion is being developed. Formative evaluation is important in telehealth interventions to help ensure 
that the strategies being used are appropriate and feasible for the providers and participants. Process, 
outcome, and impact evaluation are also important to conduct throughout the implementation of 
the intervention to ensure it is being implemented as planned and producing the desired eff ects. 
Th e technology aspects of the intervention should be considered in the evaluation process, such as 
usability, participant satisfaction, workload, and cost-eff ectiveness.24,25 Th ere is currently no “gold 
standard” evaluation framework or methods surrounding telehealth interventions. A variety of 
diff erent frameworks have been developed specifi cally for telehealth interventions, although many 
nonspecifi c frameworks including those discussed previously, such as RE-AIM, have been used.24
mHEALTH APPLICATIONS AND NUTRITION MONITORING
Cell phone use has been increasing worldwide.26 In the United States, 96% of adults own a cell 
phone, with 81% owning a smartphone.27 Although there are multiple defi nitions of mHealth, 
it generally refers to the use of mobile and wireless devices to improve health.28 Using mobile 


===PAGE 360===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
335
technologies in health programs and research is an expanding area in both developed and devel-
oping countries. A variety of mHealth technologies are used including text messages, mobile 
apps, global positioning system (GPS), Bluetooth, and wearables and sensors.26
mHealth is used in both medical care and community settings. Examples in medical care include 
text message appointment reminders, mobile apps allowing access to electronic health records, and 
video consultations with patients.26 A variety of mHealth applications and interventions have been 
developed both for general health and for prevention or treatment of specifi c conditions such as 
obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.29,30 Th ere have even been specifi c apps developed for 
individuals participating in certain federal nutrition programs, such as the WIC.31
Nutrition programs can use mHealth in a variety of ways. Nutrition messages can be sent via 
text message and may or may not include links to websites with additional content. A variety of 
mobile apps have been developed. Examples of app features include nutrition education, social 
connectivity features such as forums and team participation, encouragement and prompts such 
as rewards and push notifi cations, goal setting, game elements, environmental supports such as 
menu suggestions, and dietary tracking.29
Th ere are a variety of ways that mHealth applications can be used in evaluation and nutrition 
monitoring. Mobile phones can be used to collect survey data from participants. Th is can be 
especially helpful when participants live in hard-to-reach areas.32 Telephone surveys can be used 
to reach participants. Some public health interventions use text messages to send questions to 
participants who can then text back their responses. Participants can also complete online surveys 
on their phones or through mobile apps.
Dietary outcomes are commonly assessed in public health nutrition interventions. Th ere are 
numerous apps available to track dietary data.33 Th ese apps allow participants to enter the foods 
they are eating and can be analyzed to see specifi c foods, food groups, or nutrients. Physical 
activity can also be assessed through mobile apps, through self-report methods in which partic-
ipants record their physical activity, or through objective measurements as captured by activity 
trackers.34 Information such as weight or blood glucose levels can also be tracked. Th ese forms of 
gathering information can be used by individuals to track their own dietary intake and/or can be 
seen by healthcare providers to help with monitoring their patients.
CONCLUSION
Evaluation plays an important role in public health nutrition interventions. Using a framework to 
systematically approach an evaluation is a helpful strategy, especially given how varied evaluations 
can be in purpose and type. Examples of evaluation frameworks include the CDC Framework for 
Program Evaluation in Public Health and the RE-AIM framework. Common types of evalua-
tion include formative, process, outcome, and impact. When performing an evaluation, a logic 
model is a useful tool that can provide a schematic representation of program elements such 
as inputs, activities, and expected outputs and outcomes. Interventions can be implemented at 
varying levels, ranging from a focus on the individual to broader PSE change; thus, evaluation 
strategies can diff er based on the contextual level. Data collection methods in an evaluation can 
be quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods. Planning an evaluation should commence with 
the start of implementing a program and should include continual engagement of stakeholders 
to increase utility and acceptability of results. Additionally, evaluations present an opportunity to 
“reinvent” or improve interventions if needed. Finally, evolving strategies and technology in pub-
lic health nutrition, such as an increasing use of social media, may necessitate adapting evaluation 
approaches and also off ers new and innovative approaches to eff ective evaluation.


===PAGE 361===
336 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
KEY CONCEPTS
 
■
Evaluation can assume varying forms depending on the purpose of the evaluation and 
the needs of the audience; common types of evaluation include formative, process, 
outcome, and impact.
 
■
Th e logic model is a useful tool to guide an evaluation and commonly incorporates 
inputs, activities, outputs, and outcomes.
 
■
Methods for collecting data in an evaluation can be quantitative or qualitative; oft en, 
evaluations use a mixed methods approach, which includes a combination of quantita-
tive and qualitative methods.
 
■
A variety of frameworks are available to provide a systematic guide to evaluation; the 
CDC Framework for Program Evaluation in Public Health and the RE-AIM frame-
work are examples.
 
■
Evaluation can provide opportunities to both invent and reinvent an intervention 
depending on needs and results from previous interventions.
 
■
Th e process of evaluation must continually adapt as approaches to public health inter-
ventions evolve, as seen in the use of PSE change strategies promoting healthy environ-
ments, health communication programs engaging audiences through social media, and 
interventions incorporating mHealth applications.
CASE STUDY: A FARM-TO-SCHOOL PROGRAM 
IN THE HAPPY VALLEY SCHOOL DISTRICT
Happy Valley School District, which includes 10 schools (fi ve elementary schools, three middle 
schools, and two high schools), is going to start a farm-to-school program for their district. Th e 
school wellness committee for the district will be leading the project. Th e program includes the 
following components:
 
■
Procurement: Th e school district plans to increase the amount of local fruits and vege-
tables purchased, promoted, and served in the school cafeteria.
 
■
School gardens: Th e school district would like to start school gardens where students 
can participate in hands-on activities.
 
■
Education: Nutrition education related to fruits and vegetables, gardening, and how to 
prepare fruits and vegetables will be provided through classroom lessons and special 
events. Th ere will also be information shared with parents through methods such as a 
special section of the school website, social media, and paper handouts sent home with 
children.
 
■
Farm visits: Opportunities will be available for students to visit a farm as part of a class 
fi eld trip to understand more about agricultural production.
Th e school district does not currently serve local produce but is looking into partnering with 
local farmers to provide it. Th e district also does not currently have school gardens, but the school 
wellness committee has received a $20,000 grant from a local foundation to support the estab-
lishment of school gardens in the district. Th e principals of the schools must agree to having the 
garden and provide a location for it. Th e local health department has nutrition educators who 
are interested in providing nutrition education to interested classrooms. Th e School Wellness 
Committee has also identifi ed a local farm that is willing to provide tours to students.


===PAGE 362===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
337
Th e school wellness committee would like to evaluate their eff orts over the course of the next 
two school years and has partnered with a local university to assist with the evaluation. Th ey are 
interested in learning about how the diff erent components of the farm-to-school program are 
implemented at the schools within their districts and whether participation in the activities is 
associated with changes in attitudes, preferences, and consumption of fruits and vegetables. Th ey 
would also like to know what is working well and what can be improved upon.
For this case study, assume that you are a nutrition student from a local university who will be 
assisting the school wellness committee with the evaluation. 
Case Study Questions
1. 
Who are the stakeholders you would want to engage in the evaluation?
2. 
What outputs would you assess through your process evaluation?
3. 
What outcomes would you assess?
4. 
Th inking about the RE-AIM framework, what would you consider measuring to assess 
reach, eff ectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance?
5. 
Create a logic model for the program that includes the inputs, activities, outputs, and 
outcomes.
6. 
What data collection methods would you use?
7. 
How would you use the data you collect to provide conclusions and recommendations 
to the school wellness committee?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
 
■
Learn more about PSE change interventions. Visit snapedpse.org to browse PSE change 
examples by setting using the Snap-Ed Interactive Map. If interested in learning more 
about school gardens, fi nd this setting and explore!
 
■
Expand your evaluation framework “toolbox” by learning more about the SNAP-Ed 
Evaluation Framework found on the SNAP-Ed Toolkit’s website (snapedtoolkit
.org).
 
■
Enhance your mHealth knowledge by exploring examples of mHealth interventions 
such as Text2BHealthy (snapedtoolkit.org/interventions/programs/text2
bhealthy).
 
■
Visit the Center TRT website at www.centertrt.org for more materials developed for 
the HFE Pricing Initiative Intervention example from this chapter. Check out other 
interventions on the website!
 
■
Perform a literature search of evaluations using the RE-AIM framework and select a 
paper to review. A list of publications can be found online (www.re-aim.org/category/
publications).
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What are some challenges you may face if you wait until an intervention is already 
being implemented to plan the evaluation?


===PAGE 363===
338 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
2. 
What do you think are some of the benefi ts and challenges of using social media as an 
avenue for public health interventions?
3. 
What are some interventions you have encountered that you would like to “reinvent”? 
How would you do so?
4. 
Th ink about a public health nutrition program with which you are familiar. Who are 
the key stakeholders involved in the intervention?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
CDC Evaluation Framework. https://www.cdc.gov/eval/framework/index.htm.
Center TRT. http://www.centertrt.org.
RE-AIM. http://www.re-aim.org.
SNAP-Ed Evaluation Framework. https://snapedtoolkit.org/framework/index.
GLOSSARY
Activities: What the intervention does with the inputs in order to achieve the desired 
outcomes.
Fidelity: Th e degree of exactness with which something is copied or reproduced.
Formative evaluation: Typically occurs during the development or adaptation of an interven-
tion to ensure the intervention is feasible and acceptable.
Impact evaluation: Assesses how eff ective an intervention is at achieving its ultimate goals.
Individual-level strategies: Intervention approaches that work directly with individuals one-
on-one vs. in groups.
Inputs: Resources invested into a program.
Intervention: Any activity taken to improve public health nutrition.
Logic model: A conceptual tool that illustrates the sequential relationships between an inter-
vention’s inputs, activities, outputs, and outcomes.
Outcome evaluation: Assesses the eff ects of an intervention on achieving a program’s outcome 
objectives.
Outcomes: Th e changes an intervention expects to achieve.
Outputs: Th e direct results of the intervention’s activities that are intended to lead to the 
desired outcomes.
Photovoice: A type of participatory action research that involves participants using photo-
graphs to capture and refl ect on diff erent issues.
Process evaluation: Assesses how an intervention was implemented and whether it resulted in 
particular outputs.
Program evaluation: A systematic method for collecting, analyzing, and using information 
to answer questions about programs and policies, particularly about their eff ectiveness and 
effi  ciency.


===PAGE 364===
 
13. Public Health Nutrition Interventions and Evaluation 
339
RE-AIM framework: An evaluation framework that consists of fi ve steps (reach, eff ective-
ness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance) and aims to translate research into action.
SHOWeD method: A process that guides participants through a series of questions to help 
them refl ect on photos and the issues they represent.
REFERENCES
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Framework for Program Evaluation in Public Health. 
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 1999.
2. Steckler A, Linnan L. Process evaluation for public health interventions and research: an overview. In: 
Steckler A, Linnan L, eds. Process Evaluation for Public Health Interventions and Research. San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass; 2002:1–23.
3. UNC Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. SNAP-Ed Toolkit: SNAP-Ed Evaluation 
Framework. 2016. https://snapedtoolkit.org/framework/index
4. Morse JM. Approaches to qualitative-quantitative methodological triangulation. Nurs Res. 
1991;40(2):120–123.
5. Wang C, Burris MA. Photovoice: concept, methodology, and use for participatory needs assessment. 
Health Educ Behav. 1997;24(3):369–387. doi:10.1177/109019819702400309
6. Wang CC. Photovoice: a participatory action research strategy applied to women’s health. J Womens 
Health. 1999;8(2):185–192. doi:10.1089/jwh.1999.8.185
7. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. 2019. https://
www.cdc.gov/brfss
8. Lytle LA, Nichaman MZ, Obarzanek E, et al. Validation of 24-hour recalls assisted by food records 
in third-grade children. Th e CATCH Collaborative Group. J Am Diet Assoc. 1993;93(12):1431–1436. 
doi:10.1016/0002-8223(93)92247-U
9. Ball SC, Benjamin SE, Ward DS. Development and reliability of an observation method to assess 
food intake of young children in child care. J Am Diet Assoc. 2007;107(4):656–661. doi:10.1016/j.
jada.2007.01.003
10. Adams MA, Pelletier RL, Zive MM, Sallis JF. Salad bars and fruit and vegetable consumption in 
elementary schools: a plate waste study. J Am Diet Assoc. 2005;105(11):1789–1792. doi:10.1016/j.
jada.2005.08.013
11. Cohen JFW, Smit LA, Parker E, et al. Long-term impact of a chef on school lunch consumption: 
fi ndings from a 2-year pilot study in Boston middle schools. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;112(6):927–933. 
doi:10.1016/j.jand.2012.01.015
12. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion interventions: 
the RE-AIM framework. Am J Public Health. 1999;89(9):1322–1327. doi:10.2105/ajph.89.9.1322
13. Lobb R, Colditz GA. Implementation science and its application to population health. Annu Rev Public 
Health. 2013;34:235–251. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031912-114444
14. Glasgow RE, Emmons KM. How can we increase translation of research into practice? Types of evidence 
needed. Annu Rev Public Health. 2007;28:413–433. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.28.021406.144145
15. RE-AIM. 2019. http://www.re-aim.org
16. Center for Training and Research Translation. Healthy Food Environments Pricing Initiative. 2019. http://
www.centertrt.org/?p=intervention&id=1099
17. Leeman J, Myers AE, Ribisl KM, Ammerman AS. Disseminating policy and environmental change 
interventions: insights from obesity prevention and tobacco control. Int J Behav Med. 2015;22(3):301–
311. doi:10.1007/s12529-014-9427-1
18. Leeman J, Sommers J, Leung MM, Ammerman A. Disseminating evidence from research and practice: a 
model for selecting evidence to guide obesity prevention. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2011;17(2):133–
140. doi:10.1097/PHH.0b013e3181e39eaa
19. Leeman J, Sommers J, Vu M, et al. An evaluation framework for obesity prevention policy interventions. 
Prev Chronic Dis. 2012;9:E120. doi:10.5888/pcd9.110322


===PAGE 365===
340 
III. Community Assessment, Planning, Implementing, and Evaluation
20. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, et al. Fostering implementation of health services research 
fi ndings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. Implement Sci. 
2009;4:50. doi:10.1186/1748-5908-4-50
21. National Cancer Institute. Making Health Communication Programs Work: A Planner’s Guide. 
Washington, DC: National Cancer Institute; 2004.
22. Lapka C, Jupka K, Wray RJ, Jacobsen H. Applying cognitive response testing in message development 
and pre-testing. Health Educ Res. 2008;23(3):467–476. doi:10.1093/her/cym089
23. Th e Conclave Complete Social Media Measurement Standards June 2013. 2019. https://docs.wixstatic.
com/ugd/0b15ae_c4b5f3e188e143cca1ca263376fb b132.pdf
24. Agboola S, Hale TM, Masters C, et al. “Real-world” practical evaluation strategies: a review of telehealth 
evaluation. JMIR Res Protoc. 2014;3(4):e75. doi:10.2196/resprot.3459
25. Lau F, Kuziemsky C, eds. Handbook of EHealth Evaluation: An Evidence-Based Approach. Victoria, BC, 
Canada: University of Victoria; 2017.
26. World Health Organization. Mhealth: New Horizons for Health Th rough Mobile Technologies (Global 
Observatory for Ehealth). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2011:126.
27. Pew Research Center. Demographics of Mobile Device Ownership and Adoption in the United States. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center; 2019. https://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/mobile
28. Davis TL, DiClemente R, Prietula M. Taking mHealth forward: examining the core characteristics. 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2016;4(3):e97. doi:10.2196/mhealth.5659
29. Tonkin E, Brimblecombe J, Wycherley TP. Characteristics of smartphone applications for nutrition 
improvement in community settings: a scoping review. Adv Nutr. 2017;8(2):308–322. doi:10.3945/
an.116.013748
30. Marcolino MS, Oliveira JAQ, D’Agostino M, et al. Th e impact of mHealth interventions: systematic 
review of systematic reviews. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2018;6(1):e23. doi:10.2196/mhealth.8873
31. Weber SJ, Dawson D, Greene H, Hull PC. Mobile phone apps for low-income participants in a public 
health nutrition program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC): review and analysis of features. 
JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2018;6(11):e12261. doi:10.2196/12261
32. Firchow P, MacGinty R. Including Hard-to-Access Populations Using Mobile Phone Surveys and 
Participatory Indicators. Sociol Methods Res. 2017:1–28. doi:10.1177/0049124117729702
33. Ferrara G, Kim J, Lin S, et al. A focused review of smartphone diet-tracking apps: usability, functionality, 
coherence with behavior change theory, and comparative validity of nutrient intake and energy 
estimates. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2019;7(5):e9232. doi:10.2196/mhealth.9232
34. McCallum C, Rooksby J, Gray CM. Evaluating the impact of physical activity apps and wearables: 
interdisciplinary review. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2018;6(3):e58. doi:10.2196/mhealth.9054


===PAGE 366===
IV
CURRENT AND FUTURE 
CHALLENGES IN PUBLIC HEALTH 
NUTRITION AND SUSTAINABILITY


===PAGE 368===
14
CURRENT NUTRITION-
RELATED HEALTH ISSUES 
AND CHALLENGES
AMANDA S. HEGE, KENDRA OO, AND JOANNA CUMMINGS
You do not solve the hunger problem by feeding people. . . . Th e problems of hunger and malnutrition 
can be solved only by ensuring that people can live in dignity by having decent opportunities to provide 
for themselves.
—George Kent, Freedom from Want
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Aft er reading and studying this chapter and its contents, you should be able to:
1. Identify nutrition-related health challenges worldwide.
2. Defi ne food and nutrient needs for optimal health across the life span.
3. Describe the double burden of malnutrition.
4. Explain the four pillars of food security, which can be used to assess population nutritional 
status.
5. Describe the relationship among malnutrition, food security, hunger, and the overall 
health and wellness of a community.
INTRODUCTION
Food and nutrition have signifi cant implications for the health and well-being of a population. 
Th e benefi ts of high consumption of fruits and vegetables are well known. Th ere is strong evi-
dence that links a healthy diet with optimal growth and development, high educational attain-
ment, immune response, and longevity, in addition to decreasing the risk of developing obesity, 
diabetes, osteoporosis, cognitive decline, and certain types of cancer. Th is chapter identifi es how 
food and nutrition can promote health, quality of life, and economic prosperity. Nutrition-related 
health issues and challenges, across the globe, from infancy through adulthood, are explored. Th e 
relationship among malnutrition, food security, hunger, and health, incorporating the four pillars 
of food availability, access, utilization, and stability, will be used in assessing and developing strat-
egies that accelerate progress toward optimal health.


===PAGE 369===
344 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
NUTRITION AND HEALTH-RELATED DISEASE TRENDS
Global Burden of Malnutrition
Malnutrition, the lack of proper nutrients to meet daily needs, is the largest single contributor 
to disease and poor health outcomes in the world. Referring to both the presence of undernutri-
tion (insuffi  cient intake of energy and nutrients to meet an individual’s needs) and overnutrition 
(overconsumption of certain nutrients, such as protein, carbohydrates, and fat), the 2014 Second 
International Congress on Nutrition framed this issue as “malnutrition in all forms.” Undernutrition 
results from not getting enough energy from macronutrients (carbohydrates, protein, and fat) and 
micronutrients, thereby leading to low weight-for-height (wasting), low height-for-age (stunting), 
and low weight-for-age (underweight). Overnutrition results from an overconsumption of macro-
nutrients and energy, and leads to overweight, obesity, and diet-related chronic diseases.
Globally, 795 million individuals are malnourished, including one in every four children.1 
Th e world’s undernourished population is unevenly distributed with the majority living in Asia 
(more than 500 million). While the United States is considered the land of plenty, too many men, 
women, and children still struggle to put food on the table. According to Feeding America, the 
largest anti-hunger agency in the United States, approximately 41 million Americans and one in 
fi ve U.S. children experience food insecurity—the lack of consistent access to enough food for 
an active, healthy life—putting them at a greater risk of various forms of malnutrition and poor 
health.2 In mostly middle-income nations, where the economy has slowed or contracted, we see 
an increase in hunger, the extreme physical feeling of discomfort or weakness caused by a lack of 
food. If the current trends continue, the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (to halve the num-
ber of stunted children) and the 2025 World Health Assembly target (to reduce the prevalence of 
low birth weight) will not be met.
It is possible to be overweight or obese from excessive calorie consumption but still not get 
enough vitamins and minerals to promote good health. Th e American Medical Association 
(AMA) designated obesity as a disease that contributes to 4 million deaths annually worldwide.3 
By 2050, 60% of males and 50% of females will have obesity.4,5
Food and Nutrition Needs for Optimal Health
Th e most widely recognized defi nition of healthful eating is a high intake of fruits and vegetables.6 
Proper nutrition includes the consumption of essential macronutrients (protein, carbohydrates, 
and fats) and micronutrients (vitamin A, iodine, iron, and zinc). Essential nutrients play a critical 
role in humoral immunity responses, cellular signaling and function, learning and cognitive func-
tion, work capacity, reproductive health, and the evolution of microbial virulence (Table 14.1).7
Dietary Recommendations
Th e basics of obtaining good nutrition incorporates a variety of foods across all fi ve food groups 
(vegetables, fruits, grains, protein, and dairy; Figure 14.1).
Undernutrition and Disease
Recent estimates indicate that more than 2 billion people globally are at risk for vitamin A, iodine, 
and/or iron defi ciency. Th e prevalence is especially high in Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan 
Africa. In many settings, more than one micronutrient defi ciency exists, suggesting the need for 
simple approaches that evaluate and address multiple micronutrient malnutrition.8


===PAGE 370===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
345
TABLE 14.1 ESSENTIAL NUTRIENTS AND THEIR PRIMARY FUNCTIONS 
AND DIETARY SOURCES
NUTRIENT
FUNCTION
SOURCE
Macronutrient
Protein 
(Nine essential amino 
acids in foods)
Repairs body tissues and cells; healthy 
functioning of immune system; manu-
facturing hormones 
Beans and legumes, seeds, nuts, 
quinoa, beets, raw greens (kale, 
spinach), avocado, meat, fi sh, eggs, 
and dairy 
Carbohydrate
Primary energy source;
comprises 45% to 65% of diet
Apples, bananas, caulifl ower, 
carrots, oats, brown rice, quinoa, 
chickpeas, kidney beans
Fat 
(Focus on healthy*)
Improves brain development, cell func-
tioning, protects the body’s organs, 
helps absorb vitamins and minerals 
Almonds, walnuts, seeds, olives, 
avocados*
Micronutrient
Vitamin A
Promotes good eyesight; as an anti-
oxidant, maintains healthy teeth and 
skin; supports healthy pregnancy and 
breastfeeding; fat-soluble
Salmon, eggs, cooked sweet 
potato, winter squash, kale, collards, 
turnip greens, carrots, Swiss chard, 
spinach
Iodine
Regulates thyroid hormones; promotes 
proper bone and brain development 
during pregnancy and infancy 
Cod, seaweed, yogurt, iodized salt, 
milk, enriched bread, shrimp
Iron
Functions of hemoglobin, protein 
needed to transport oxygen in the 
blood; promotes healthy pregnancy, 
increased energy, and improved ath-
letic performance 
Fortifi ed grains, white beans, 
canned clams, lean ground beef, 
dark chocolate, beans, nuts, baked 
potato cooked spinach†
Zinc
Supports healthy immune system, heal 
wounds, and proper senses of taste 
and smell; promotes healthy pregnancy 
Oysters, lean meat, poultry, seafood 
(crab and lobsters), fortifi ed grains
*Sources of healthy, monounsaturated/polyunsaturated fats.
†Consuming vitamin C–rich foods alongside plant-based (non-heme) iron sources will increase absorption.
Source: Data from Kapil U, Bhavna A. Adverse effects of poor micronutrient status during childhood and adolescence. 
Nutr Rev. 2002;60(suppl 5):S84–S90. doi:10.1301/00296640260130803
Nutrient Defi ciencies
Anemia, one of the major global nutrition concerns, is caused by a defi ciency in iron and is asso-
ciated with other nutrient defi ciencies including vitamins A, B6, and B12; ribofl avin; and folic 
acid.9 General infections, chronic diseases, malaria, and helminth infestation can also contribute 
to developing anemia.
Iodine defi ciency disorder (IDD) is a public health problem in 130 countries and aff ects about 
13% of the world’s population.10 Globally, about 740 million people are aff ected by goiter and over 
2 billion are considered at risk for IDD. Th e major consequence of IDD is impaired development 
of the fetal brain. Iodization of salt in the 1940s has been one of the most successful food fortifi -
cation initiatives, but many countries lack access to this resource.
Zinc is a vital micronutrient for body function. Defi ciency of zinc, which is essential for DNA 
and protein synthesis, can lead to growth failure in children. Subclinical zinc defi ciency has been 


===PAGE 371===
346 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
FIGURE 14.1 A healthy eating pattern for an average U.S. adult, 2,000 calories a day.
A variety of colors
including dark green,
red, and orange
2½ cups
Limit saturated fats to less than 10% of daily calories, Eliminate trans fats
Limit added sugars to less than 10% of daily calories
Limit sodium to less than 2,300 mg a day 
Half of which
are whole
grains 
6 ounces
Low-fat milk,
yogurt, cheese,
and fortified soy
3 cups
Seafood, lean
meat, poultry,
eggs, beans
5½ ounces
Healthy oils such as
olive oil, nuts, and
avocados
5 teaspoons
Especially 
whole fruits
2 cups
Dairy
Grains
Vegetables
Protein
Fruit
recognized as a signifi cant limiting factor for growth among children in both developing and 
developed countries.11
Clinical vitamin A defi ciency (VAD) aff ects over 2 million preschool children in over 60 coun-
tries and subclinical VAD is considered a problem for at least 250 million school-aged children 
and pregnant women. VAD has been shown to increase morbidity and mortality rates and to 
contribute to delayed growth and is the leading cause of blindness in children.
Infectious and Communicable Disease
Th e burden of infectious diseases coincides with malnutrition, recognized as “the primary cause 
of immunodefi ciency worldwide.”12 Undernutrition is immunosuppressive and contributes to 
spread of communicable diseases, infectious diseases that are contagious. Protein defi ciency 
(kwashiorkor) was historically believed to be the predominant basis of malnutrition. Severe 
protein defi ciency bears a defi nite relationship to antibody formation and development of the 
immune system in infants and children. Th e immunosuppressive eff ect of undernutrition starts 
during intrauterine life, as maternal nutrition impacts immune function of the off spring. Th e top 
infectious diseases include:
Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which aff ects the 
lungs. Globally, it is estimated that 10 million people developed TB in 2018, a num-
ber that has remained relatively stable. Th e highest burden of disease is in adult men, 
accounting for 57% of all TB cases in 2018. Adult women accounted for 32% and chil-
dren 11% of cases worldwide in 2018. Drug-resistant TB is a public health crisis and it 
is estimated that 500,000 people who developed TB in 2018 were resistant to rifampi-
cin and 78% of them had multi-drug-resistant TB. Nearly 1.7 billion people, 23% of the 


===PAGE 372===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
347
world population, have latent TB infection and are at risk of developing active TB in 
their lifetime.13
HIV infection impairs the immune system, increasing susceptibility to opportunistic 
infections, weight loss, fever, and diarrhea. HIV-positive patients are 26 to 31 times 
more likely to develop active TB. Prevalence of HIV-TB infection is greatest in Africa. 
According to the Global Tuberculosis 2019 report, TB caused an estimated 1.2 million 
deaths among HIV-negative people and an additional 251,000 deaths among HIV-
positive people.13 HIV-positive individuals also have reduced appetite and an impaired 
ability to absorb food. One of the most concerning nutritional impacts of HIV infec-
tion is the emergence of severe weight loss and muscle wasting. Severe malnutrition is 
seen in advanced stages of HIV infection.
Neglected tropical diseases are a diverse group of diseases that thrive mainly among the 
poorest populations in tropical and subtropical conditions, oft en seen in populations 
without adequate sanitation and in close contact with infectious vectors, domestic 
animals, and livestock. WHO has publicized 17 neglected tropical diseases, which are 
endemic in 149 countries and aff ect more than 1 billion people with infested water. 
Soil-transmitted helminthiases are the most common parasitic infection, caused by 
nematode infections transmitted through oral–fecal transmission. Nematodes (e.g., 
hookworm, whipworm, roundworm) can cause anemia, vitamin A defi ciency, stunted 
growth, malnutrition, intestinal obstruction, and impaired development. Th e para-
sitic burden in a person can cause undernutrition due to lack of appetite, poor intake 
due to food contamination, and an increased metabolic rate. Nutrient losses occur 
from vomiting, intestinal bleeding, diarrhea, and reduced absorption of nutrients. 
Secondary outcomes, such as reducing anemia and zinc and iodine defi ciency have 
been observed. Key prevention strategies include proper hygiene, sanitation, and 
vaccination.
Acute respiratory infections are the leading cause of death in children under 5 years of age, 
with nearly 1 million documented deaths in 2018. Pneumonia is the most frequent 
infection and is caused by bacteria, viruses, and fungi.126
Diarrheal diseases are generally caused by poor hygiene, inadequate sanitation, and con-
taminated water. Th e most common bacterial infections are due to Escherichia coli (E. 
coli), Vibrio, Salmonella, Shigella, and Clostridioides diffi  cile (C. diff ); viral infections 
include rotavirus and protozoa like Cryptosporidium and Giardia. WHO estimates 
that diarrheal diseases aff ect 1.7 billion people annually and they constitute one of the 
leading causes of malnutrition in children.126
Measles causes over 135,000 deaths each year, despite being completely preventable by vac-
cine. Th e most vulnerable populations are pregnant women and children under 5 years 
of age, those with suppressed immune systems, and those with vitamin A defi ciency.127 
Some of the most severe consequences of measles include dehydration, diarrhea, blind-
ness, and respiratory infections.
Malaria occurs in two forms, caused by Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax. Th ere are over 
2 million cases of malaria each year. From 2010 to 2016, malaria deaths were cut by 
25% across the globe. However, in 2018, an estimated 228 million cases were reported 
and an estimated 405,000 people died, specifi cally impacting young children in 
sub-Saharan Africa.128


===PAGE 373===
348 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Between 1990 and 2017, early death from diarrhea, typhoid fevers, intestinal infections, respi-
ratory infections, and tuberculosis, and maternal and neonatal disorders decreased globally, with 
the greatest declines in the least developed countries. According to the 2011–2020 WHO action 
plan, a global push to improve vaccine coverage resulted in a 79% reduction in deaths. As of 2015, 
global coverage of vaccines was 37% (129 countries) and 23% (84 countries) for pneumococcal 
and rotavirus. By 2025, WHO and UNICEF aim to reduce child mortality rates from pneumonia 
to 3/1,000 and from diarrhea to 1/1,000 of all live births.129
Overnutrition and Disease
Progress in reducing global mortality rates from disease has stalled or reversed primarily owing to 
an increase in noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). Overweight and obesity are modifi able risk 
factors for NCDs including type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory 
disease, and cancers. Obesity is the top risk factor that contributes to disability-adjusted life years 
globally, even among high-income countries.14 In 2016, NCDs accounted for 72.3% of all deaths 
globally and almost half (42%) of NCD deaths are premature (occurring before the age of 70).15,16
Factors Infl uencing Overnutrition
Poor diets are driving overnutrition and are a signifi cant cause of death and disability worldwide. 
Although the importance of fruits and vegetables is recognized, 87% of the population consume 
too few vegetables and 75% do not meet the goal for recommended fruit intake.17 On average, 
too many processed foods that contain high fructose corn syrup and added fats are consumed, 
characterizing the Western pattern diet (WPD) or standard American diet (SAD) that includes 
high intake of red and processed meats, packaged foods, butter, fried foods, high-fat dairy, corn, 
refi ned grains, and potatoes (Figure 14.2).18
Dietary consumption is infl uenced by the food system in which food is grown, harvested, processed, 
distributed, prepared, marketed, and disposed of in addition to nutritional, social, environmental, 
FIGURE 14.2 Average daily percent of calories in the standard American diet.
Source: From Hiza H, Casavale K, Guenther P, Davis C. Diet quality of Americans differs by age, sex, race/ethnicity, 
income, and education level. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;113(2):297–306. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2012.08.011
Fruits and
vegetables
8%
Added fats
and oils
23%
Dairy
11%
Sweeteners
17%
Meats, eggs,
and nuts
18%
Processed
foods
63%
Flour and
cereal
23%


===PAGE 374===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
349
and economic drivers. Access to healthy, nutrient-dense food is identifi ed as a leading challenge to 
suffi  cient intake.19 Obesogenic food environments include “the sum of infl uences that the surround-
ings, opportunities, or conditions of life have on promoting obesity in individuals or populations,” 
off ering easy access to fast food restaurants and processed foods.20 Consumers also report price as a 
primary challenge to adequate consumption.21 Studies conducted in India show that income inequal-
ity had the same eff ect on the risk of being overweight as it did on being underweight.22
Assessing Overnutrition
Overweight and obesity are defi ned diff erently for each age group. Children under 5 years of 
age are not typically defi ned as being overweight or obese, as they are still growing and the child 
should maintain growth along the percentile trajectory. For school-age children and adolescents 
(ages 5 to 19 years), being overweight indicates having a body mass index (BMI) for age >1 stan-
dard deviation above the WHO growth reference standard median, whereas obesity is defi ned as 
having a BMI for age more than 2 standard deviations above. In the case of adults, overweight is 
a BMI ≥25 (except for Asian ethnicities); and obesity is a BMI ≥30.
Cultural competency is an important consideration when assessing and diagnosing NCDs. For 
example, there is a high prevalence of diabetes and cardiovascular disease in parts of Asia, where 
the average BMI is below 25, the typical threshold for overweight. South Asians tend to have less 
muscle and more abdominal fat compared to white Europeans, so the same BMI may represent 
a higher percentage of body fat in Asians. Th is highlights the limitations of BMI for assessing 
adiposity and cardio-metabolic risk. As diabetes may occur at lower BMIs in Asian populations, 
WHO has suggested a lower BMI cut-off  point.23 Th e traditional overweight range is 25.0 to 29.9 
kg/m2, whereas for Asian populations, there is an increased risk of cardiovascular disease when 
BMI is between 23.0 and 27.4 kg/m2. For obesity, the traditional range is >30 kg/m2 but for Asian 
populations it is >27.5 kg/m2. Ethnic cut-off  points have also been suggested for waist circumfer-
ence.24 Incorporating BMI and waist circumference cut-off  points that are culturally sensitive into 
screening programs may help reduce the diabetes burden on these populations.
Overweight and Obesity
Th e obesogenic culture has spread worldwide, leading to adult BMI rising steadily by 2 percent-
age points per decade. Although undernutrition is still more prevalent than overnutrition among 
children, the opposite will be true by 2022 if increasing trends continue at their current rate.25
While Asia and Africa have the lowest overweight prevalence, together they accounted for 
nearly three-fourths of all overweight children under the age of 5. Oceania is an example of a region 
where the population is aff ected by the double burden of malnutrition, with high prevalence of 
both acute malnutrition (wasting) and overweight. China has more than 10,000 American-based 
fast-food restaurants (such as McDonald’s) and increasing obesity rates that surpass 20% in some 
cities. An estimated 160 million Americans are either obese or overweight, accounting for nearly 
30% of boys and girls under the age of 20 (Figure 14.3).26 In 2016, nearly 40% of U.S. adults were 
obese, costing an estimated US$147 billion annually. Th e medical cost for those with obesity is 
nearly US$1,500 higher a year than for those of normal weight.27
Type 2 Diabetes
Th e International Diabetes Federation’s projection of increases in worldwide adult type 2 diabe-
tes showed the greatest rise between 2017 and 2045 to be in Southeast Asia (84% increase), the 


===PAGE 375===
350 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Middle East and North Africa (110% increase), and Africa (156% increase).28 Type 2 diabetes 
occurs when the body does not produce enough insulin (a hormone that regulates blood sugar 
levels) or resists the eff ects of insulin, lacking the ability to maintain normal blood sugar levels. 
Primary risk factors include overweight and obesity, fat distribution in the abdomen, inactivity, 
family history, race (black, Hispanic, Asian), and age. It is managed with medication and typically 
can be cured through lifestyle changes including a healthy diet and physical activity.
Cardiovascular Disease
Referring to conditions that involve narrowed or blocked blood vessels, cardiovascular disease 
includes heart attack, chest pain (angina), and stroke. Heart damage or atherosclerosis, buildup of 
fatty plaque in the arteries, contributes to artery stiff ening and inhibits the fl ow of blood to organs 
and tissues. Common causes are an unhealthy diet, overweight and obesity, smoking, stress, and 
lack of physical activity. It is the leading cause of death for both men and women and one in four 
Americans die of cardiovascular disease annually.29
Respiratory Disease
Nutrition plays a critical role in both preventing and managing certain respiratory diseases, 
including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma. Maintaining a healthy 
weight is important.30 For many, breathing is unconscious and eff ortless; however, for those with 
respiratory diseases, breathing requires a conscious eff ort and an increase in energy requirements. 
Unintentional weight loss can also be due to diffi  culty swallowing or chewing, mouth breathing 
that can alter the taste of food, coughing, fatigue, chronic mucus production, depression, or med-
ication side eff ects.31
FIGURE 14.3 Prevalence* of self-reported obesity among U.S. adults by state and territory, 
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), 2017.
*Prevalence estimates reflect BRFSS methodological changes started in 2011. These estimates should not be com-
pared to prevalence estimates before 2011.
Note: Sample size <50 or the relative standard error (dividing the standard error by the prevalence) ≥30%.
Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Data & Statistics: Adult Obesity Facts. 2018. https://www.cdc
.gov/obesity/data/prevalence-maps.html
TX
CA
MT
AZ
ID
NV
NM
CO
IL
OR
UT
KS
WY
NE
SD
MN
FL
OK
WI
WA
GA
MI
IN
PA
NY
NC
TN
VA
OH
SC
ME
VTNH
MDDE
NJ
MA
CT RI
HI
DC
GU
AK
20%-<25%
25%-<30%
30%-<35%
≥35%
Insufficient data*
PR
IA
ND
MO
AL
LA
AR
MS
KY
WV


===PAGE 376===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
351
Cancer
According to WHO, between 30% and 50% of cancers can be prevented by proper nutrition. 
Cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and surgery can contribute to side 
eff ects that impact appetite, leading to unintentional weight loss. Focusing on protein to support 
muscle strengthening and resisting infections, carbohydrates to sustain energy, and healthy fats 
to promote heart health, in combination with treatments, is helpful. Water consumption is vital 
to replenish healthy cell growth.32
Malnutrition in all forms can lead to serious negative health consequences. Th e development 
of vaccines and decreasing undernutrition have led to signifi cant improvements such as declin-
ing trends in communicable diseases, such as infections and neonatal disorders; however, there 
has been a rapid increase in NCDs such as obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancers 
worldwide. Children who are overweight are at a higher risk of obesity, related diseases, and early 
death. Obtaining proper nutrition through a high intake of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains is 
essential in accelerating progress toward good health.
MATERNAL, INFANT, AND CHILD HEALTH
Maternal and Child Health Trends
Despite numerous advances and improvements in maternal and child health, malnutrition 
remains a signifi cant challenge. Nearly half of all deaths in children under the age of 5 is attributed 
to poor nutrition.4 Improving nutrition during the critical fi rst 1,000 days, from conception to the 
child’s second birthday, has the potential to save lives and allow millions of children to develop 
fully and thrive.
Micronutrient defi ciency is a major contributor to malnutrition and the impact is more dev-
astating in children, especially young infants. Th e condition of maternal and childhood undernu-
trition includes a wide array of consequences:
 
■
Poor fetal growth, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) resulting in low birth weight;
 
■
Stunting, a chronic restriction of growth in height indicated by short stature;
 
■
Wasting, characterized by acute weight loss indicated by low weight-for-height; and
 
■
Less visible micronutrient defi ciencies.122 
Stunting and wasting cause irreparable harm by impeding physical growth, signifi cantly 
increasing the risk of chronic disease. Children who are stunted or born with IUGR have been 
shown to complete fewer years of schooling and earn less income as adults, hindering their 
cognitive growth and economic potential. Lower income, poor health, and reduced access to 
proper nutrition continue to impact the health of children born into future generations, estab-
lishing a repetitive cycle. Th e most prevalent diseases due to childhood micronutrient defi cien-
cies are:
Anemia. According to a systematic review of 23 nationally representative surveys, 37% of 
nonpregnant women and 24% of school children worldwide have anemia caused by a 
defi ciency of iron.33 In young children, the peak prevalence occurs around 18 months 
of age and then falls as iron requirements decline and iron intake is increased through 
complementary foods. Women of child-bearing age are at high risk for negative iron 
balance because of blood loss during menstruation and the substantial needs for iron 
during pregnancy.


===PAGE 377===
352 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Iodine defi ciency disorder impairs motor and mental development of the fetus and increases 
risk of miscarriage and fetal growth restriction. Maternal supplementation with iodine 
improves pregnancy outcomes, and neurological and cognitive development of the 
infant.34 Breast milk iodine content is very low in areas of endemic iodine defi ciency, 
exacerbating depletion in infants. A meta-analysis showed that populations with 
chronic iodine defi ciency have a 13.5-point reduction in IQ scores.35
Zinc defi ciency disorder. Zinc is a vital micronutrient for body function and growth and is 
essential for DNA, protein synthesis, and several metalloenzymes. It is estimated that 
one third of the world population lives in countries with a high prevalence of zinc defi -
ciency, resulting in increased risk of diarrhea, pneumonia, and malaria in children.36,37
Neural tube defects. Folic acid protects unborn babies against serious birth defects and can 
prevent against early pregnancy loss. Sources include leafy green vegetables, oranges, 
and beans and in fortifi ed breads, pastas, and cereals. A prenatal vitamin is recom-
mended for all women of childbearing age.38
Rickets. Vitamin D defi ciency in utero can cause poor fetal growth and skeletal mineraliza-
tion, and is followed by lower concentrations of vitamin D in breast milk. An estimated 
35% to 80% of children in countries such as Turkey, India, Egypt, China, Libya, and 
Lebanon are vitamin D defi cient owing to the practice of shrouding, avoidance of skin 
exposure to sunlight, and foods not being fortifi ed with vitamin D.39 A combination of 
vitamin D and calcium defi ciency is recognized as the main cause of rickets.
Additional micronutrient defi ciencies. Clinical VAD aff ects at least 2.8 million preschool 
children in more than 60 countries.40 Children with shigellosis can lose a signifi cant 
amount of vitamin A in the urine, thus further contributing to VAD. In women with 
malnutrition, the content of vitamin B12 in breast milk can be so low that symptoms of 
defi ciency appear in their breast-fed infants, including failure to thrive, stunting, poor 
neurocognitive function, and global developmental delays. A supplement containing 
vitamins B, C, and E can decrease the prevalence of IUGR.
Factors Infl uencing Nutritional Status
Major contributing factors for undernutrition are prolonged and recurrent diarrhea, poor dietary 
intake, suboptimal breastfeeding, and low socioeconomic status. In recent years, the association 
of increased micronutrient losses, such as zinc and copper, with severe diarrhea has been well 
recognized. Th e risk of micronutrient defi ciency in infancy and early childhood can also be com-
pounded by the presence of low body stores from birth and poor complementary feeding prac-
tices. Th us, poor intake of complementary foods, as well as selection of unhealthy foods, may lead 
to iron and zinc defi ciencies.
Poverty and socioeconomic inequity remain important factors in the presence of micronutri-
ent defi ciency. Among children 4 years of age and younger, food insecurity is associated with fair 
or poor health and puts children at risk for developmental delays.41 Low-resource households are 
shown to have lower intakes of meat and dairy products and higher intake of cereal-based diets 
with poor iron and zinc bioavailability.
Drug Addiction and Substance Abuse
Addictive disorders have severe nutritional defi ciencies and are linked with blood-borne diseases, 
including HIV infection and hepatitis C, that can exacerbate malnutrition. Although the United 


===PAGE 378===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
353
States has only 5% of the world population, Americans consume nearly 80% of the world’s opi-
oid supply, with the highest rates seen among young adults (18–25 years old).42 Th e prevalence 
of misuse is also higher in Europe, as well as Southwest and Central Asia (Iran, Pakistan, and 
Afghanistan), than the global average. Research shows an overlap between opioid misuse, opioid 
use disorder (OUD), and heroin use, contributing to malnutrition and death.43
One of the most vulnerable populations for OUD are pregnant women and neonates. Th e 
proportion of U.S. babies born with neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) increased fi vefold 
from 2000 to 2012, disproportionately impacting rural and low-resource communities.44 More 
than 86% of pregnancies conceived by women with OUD are unintended, compared with 
31% of pregnancies in the general population.45 NAS is characterized by excessive crying, 
increased muscle tone, tremors, and sleep disturbances in addition to signifi cant gastrointes-
tinal dysfunction including poor feeding, poor sucking and swallowing, vomiting, diarrhea, 
and weight loss.
A comprehensive treatment for OUD in pregnant women that includes medication-as-
sisted therapy and proper nutrition is critical for limiting the eff ects of NAS on unborn chil-
dren. Breastfeeding is protective against illicit drug use and increases maternal confi dence; thus, 
breastfed infants are less likely to need pharmacologic treatment for NAS. During treatment and 
detoxifi cation programs, unintentional weight loss, vitamin D defi ciency, and protein deprivation 
are commonly observed in women. Increasing dietary intake of protein and reducing simple car-
bohydrates can help with treatment. Malabsorption of vitamins and minerals can also occur and 
a multivitamin that includes zinc, iron, calcium, vitamin D, chromium, potassium, magnesium, 
and other essential nutrients should be prescribed. Zinc helps with improving immune system 
and proper brain function; calcium and magnesium will reduce the incidence of nervous and 
muscular disorders that are common among this population.46
Child Nutrition
All newborns should be breastfed within 1 hour aft er birth (“kangaroo care”), exclusively 
breastfed for the fi rst 6 months of life, and continue breastfeeding up to the second year of 
life. Recent reviews have shown that a lack of breastfeeding has led to a 47% to 157% increase 
in mortality rate in 6- to 11-month-old and 12- to 23-month-old children, respectively.47 In 
Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean, only 47% to 57% of infants younger than 2 
months are breastfed.
Even with optimal breastfeeding, children will become stunted and malnourished if they do 
not receive an adequate quantity and quality of complementary foods aft er 6 months of age. Most 
stunting and wasting happens in the fi rst 2 years of life when children have a high demand for 
nutrients and there are limitations in the diet. Children under the age of 2 also have a high rate of 
infectious diseases, which can adversely aff ect growth and nutritional status.
Prenatal nutritional environments are associated with the child’s risk of developing cardiovas-
cular disease, type 2 diabetes, and obesity in adulthood.48 Studies show that off spring of pregnant 
women during famine had a lower birth weight and were predisposed to NCDs. Famine in early 
gestation increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, dyslipidemia, and obesity. Famine during 
midgestation increased microalbuminuria and renal function disorders. Famine in late gestation 
enhances the risk of type 2 diabetes. Malnourished conditions in fetal life with poor growth in 
utero (IUGR) lead to impaired glucose and energy metabolism, including enhanced production 
of hepatic glucose, decreased insulin sensitivity for muscle protein synthesis, and impaired pan-
creatic development.


===PAGE 379===
354 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Adolescent Nutrition
Adolescent nutrition is relevant to maternal nutrition, as pregnancies in adolescents have a higher 
risk of complications and higher mortality rate in mothers and poorer birth outcomes than preg-
nancies in older women.49 Pregnancy in adolescence can also slow and stunt a girl’s growth. Th ere 
are 1.2 billion adolescents (10–19 years old) in the world, 90% of whom live in low- and mid-
dle-income countries where fertility rates are signifi cantly higher. Additionally, adolescent fertil-
ity is three times higher in low- and middle-income countries.
Maternal Nutrition
Maternal obesity can lead to adverse maternal and fetal complications during pregnancy, deliv-
ery, and the postpartum period.50 Obese pregnant women (prepregnant BMI >30 kg/m2) are four 
times more likely to develop gestational diabetes mellitus and two times more likely to develop 
preeclampsia compared with women of a normal BMI (BMI 18.5–24.9 kg/m2). During labor and 
delivery, maternal obesity is associated with maternal death, hemorrhage, cesarean delivery, or 
infection and a higher risk of neonatal and infant death, birth trauma, and infant macrosomia.51
Maternal undernutrition, including chronic energy and micronutrient defi ciencies, is preva-
lent around the world. In some countries, more than 10% of women have BMI ranges from 10% to 
19%. With a prevalence of low BMI in about 40% of women, the situation is considered critical in 
India, Bangladesh, and Eritrea. Maternal short stature is a risk factor for cesarean delivery, largely 
related to cephalopelvic disproportion. A meta-analysis of epidemiological studies found a 60% 
(95% CI [confi dence interval] 50–70) increased need for assisted delivery among women in the 
lowest quartile of stature (146 cm–157 cm) compared to women in the highest quartile. Maternal 
undernutrition has little eff ect on the volume of composition of breast milk unless malnutrition 
is severe. Th e concentration of some micronutrients (vitamin A, iodine, thiamin, ribofl avin, pyr-
idoxine, and cobalamin) in breast milk is dependent on maternal status and intake, so the risk of 
infant depletion is increased by maternal defi ciency. Maternal supplementation of these micronu-
trients increases the amount secreted in breast milk and can improve infant status.
Intervention Coverage Trends
Th ere is a direct need to scale-up interventions that directly impact the nutritional status of 
women and children. Many of the highest impact interventions are found within the fi rst 1,000 
days and several contribute to achieving multiple targets (Table 14.2).
Th e double burden of undernutrition and overnutrition is increasingly a challenge for women 
of childbearing age. Undernutrition undermines the survival and growth of children, while obe-
sity doubles the risk for complications including preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and chronic 
disease for both mom and baby later in life. Appropriate nutrition assessment, intervention, 
and management are necessary for all women of childbearing age, specifi cally adolescent girls. 
Investments in nutrition interventions alone are not enough to reach the goals of healthy devel-
opment; improvements in water and sanitation, agriculture, women’s health, and education are 
also necessary to accelerate progress.
HEALTH PROMOTION FOR YOUNG ADULTS, SPECIFICALLY COLLEGE 
AND UNIVERSITY STUDENTS
Undergraduate college years are considered a critical transitional period for most traditional col-
lege students, especially in relation to health behaviors and consequences, as individuals begin to 


===PAGE 380===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
355
TABLE 14.2 GLOBAL MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH INTERVENTIONS
INTERVENTION AND 
TARGET ADDRESSED
DESCRIPTION AND ASSUMPTIONS
For pregnant women and mothers of infants
Micronutrient supplemen-
tation for pregnant women 
(stunting, anemia)
Includes iron and folic acid supplementation, and at least one addi-
tional micronutrient for approximately 180 days of pregnancy. Delivered 
as part of antenatal care. 
Promotion of good infant 
and young child nutrition 
and hygiene practices (stunt-
ing, exclusive breastfeeding)
Individual or group-based counseling sessions to promote exclusive 
breastfeeding (0–5 months of age) and continued breastfeeding, and 
timely introduction and appropriate quality and quantity of comple-
mentary foods for children (6–24 months of age).
Balanced protein-energy 
supplementation (stunting)
Nutritional supplementation during pregnancy for pregnant women 
living under the poverty line (US$1.25/day). Delivered through existing 
community, health facility, or social safety net programs.
Intermittent preventive treat-
ment for malaria in preg-
nancy (stunting, anemia)
Two doses of sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine for pregnant women (in 
malaria endemic areas only) delivered as part of antenatal care. 
For infants and young children
Vitamin A supplementation 
for children (stunting)
Two doses per year for children 6–59 months old delivered through 
mass campaigns. 
Prophylactic zinc supplemen-
tation (stunting)
120 packets of zinc (10 mg/day) per child per year for children 6–59 
months old. Delivered through community mechanisms similar to multi-
ple micronutrient supplementation. 
Public provision of comple-
mentary foods (stunting, 
wasting)
Supplemental foods for children 6 to 23 months of age, living under 
the poverty line delivered through community-based nutrition pro-
grams or existing social safety net programs. 
Treatment of severe acute 
malnutrition (SAM; severe 
wasting)
Treatment of SAM with ready-to-use therapeutic foods (RUTF) in children 
6 to 59 months of age with weight-for-height below 3 SD or MUAC <115 
mm. Outpatient treatment for uncomplicated cases and inpatient treat-
ment (in the stabilization phase) for patients with complications.
For women of reproductive age
Iron and folic acid supple-
mentation for nonpregnant 
women (anemia)
Weekly supplementation of 60 mg iron + 0.4 g folic acid delivered 
through public provision via schools, community health workers, hospitals, 
and private distribution for women above the poverty line.
For the general population
Staple food fortifi cation 
(anemia)
Fortifi cation of wheat and maize fl our as well as rice with iron and folic 
acid, and distributed through the marketplace.
Pro-breastfeeding 
social policies (exclusive 
breastfeeding)
Policies, legislation, and monitoring, and enforcement of poli-
cies related to the International Code of Marketing of Breast Milk 
Substitutes and subsequent resolutions, WHO Ten Steps integration 
into hospital accreditation, and maternity protection/leave.
National breastfeeding pro-
motion campaign (exclusive 
breastfeeding)
Large scale efforts and use of mass media to promote breastfeeding.
MUAC, mid-upper arm circumference; SD, standard deviation.
Source: Adapted from Shekar M, Kakietek J, D’Alimonte M, et al. Investing in Nutrition from the Foundation 
of Development. The World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/963161467989517289/
pdf/104865-REVISED-Investing-in-Nutrition-FINAL.pdf


===PAGE 381===
356 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
gain autonomy in lifestyle choices with less parental infl uence. Students transitioning into college 
life oft en undergo major lifestyle changes, including dietary behaviors, that can positively or neg-
atively aff ect their physical and mental health. As this transitional stage is unique to young adults 
in college settings, it is important to discuss this population’s health trends and infl uential factors 
on their health and nutritional statuses, independent of the broader adult population.
College and University Health Trends
According to the American College Health Association National College Health Assessment 
(ACHA-NCHA), 37% of college students (n = 54,497) were overweight or obese in 2019.52 Th e 
obesity epidemic comes with an increased risk for developing chronic diseases, including type 
2 diabetes and heart disease.53 Proper nutrition is vital to achieving good physical, mental, and 
emotional development during young adulthood (18–25 years of age); however, nearly all college 
students report overnutrition, consuming the standard American diet, which includes less than 
fi ve servings of fruits and vegetables per day.
In addressing overweight and obesity in young adults, it is important to be mindful of disor-
dered eating. Nearly 20% of college students, both male and female, report an eating disorder. 
Increase in workload, less structure, and more focus on peers collide with anxiety, learning chal-
lenges, and poor self-esteem to create a “perfect storm” for eating disorders in this population. 
Th e most common disorders are anorexia, an emotional disorder characterized by an obsessive 
desire to lose weight by refusing to eat; binge eating disorder, characterized by recurrent binge-eat-
ing without any behaviors to counter the eff ects of overeating; and bulimia, a distortion of body 
image in which bouts of extreme overeating are followed by self-induced vomiting, purging, or 
fasting. Initiatives that promote healthy body image are becoming popular on campuses, such as 
Th e Body Project, a national group-based intervention that provides a forum for individuals to 
confront unrealistic beauty ideals.
College counseling centers recognize psychological problems, such as stress, anxiety, and 
depression, as a signifi cant and growing concern on their campuses, leading to poor health 
among this population. Nearly all students report having some level of stress (98%) and 88% 
felt overwhelmed, 14% had seriously considered suicide, and 10% self-harmed themselves in 
the past 12 months.52 Stress-related problems impact student well-being and academic perfor-
mance, as numerous research studies show a link between poor mental health and overnutrition. 
Additionally, sleep deprivation (averaging under 6 hours a night) is associated with mental health 
problems and malnutrition in young adults.
Barriers to Achieving Good Health
Lifestyle Factors
Modifi able lifestyle factors contribute to malnutrition and poor health among college students, 
including unhealthy eating habits, excessive alcohol consumption or binge drinking, and physi-
cal inactivity.54 Maintaining healthy eating habits as part of the daily routine is a common chal-
lenge for all age groups, but it is shown to be particularly challenging for young adults and 
college students. College students experience unhealthy lifestyle choices as they transition 
from adolescence to young adulthood, learning to manage social life, basic needs, fi nances, and 
coursework with less infl uence from parents or guardians. According to the American Heart 
Association and College of Sports Medicine, 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes 
of vigorous-intensity physical activity per week is recommended for young adults. However, 


===PAGE 382===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
357
only 46% of students met those recommendations, while 27% consumed fi ve or more alcoholic 
beverages in one sitting at least once in the past 2 weeks.52 Excessive calorie intake from binge 
drinking with the lack of physical activity can result in an unhealthy weight gain that exacerbates 
the overall health and well-being of college students.
Financial Hardship
Th e U.S. Government Accountability Offi  ce (GAO) estimates a nearly twofold increase in an 
average in-state net price (tuition, room, and board) for a full-time undergraduate student at 
public 4-year institutions over the past 30 years; while there was also an increase in the number 
of students from households with an income at or below 130% of the poverty level.55 With the 
increase in cost of attendance, student loans are heavily relied upon to pay tuition and the critical 
expenses of basic needs, such as food, housing, medical care, and transportation.56 Moreover, the 
least expensive campus dining plans in many universities are more expensive than the offi  cial 
USDA Th rift y Food Plan (US$1.79 per meal), recognized as the most aff ordable food plan by 
the USDA. Th ese economic conditions, along with failures in built environment, such as trans-
portation diffi  culties, place a signifi cant fi nancial burden on college students’ ability to maintain 
good health.
Food and Nutrition Insecurity
A 2016 comprehensive survey of college students at 34 community colleges and 4-year colleges 
in 12 states found that 48% qualifi ed as food insecure. Of those surveyed, 22% were identifi ed as 
hungry, meaning they experienced very low food security.57 Additionally, a recent study of 33,000 
college students in seven states (Louisiana, Pennsylvania, New York, California, New Jersey, 
Wisconsin, and Wyoming) found that 9% of students experienced homelessness in the past year.58 
Food insecurity is linked with both age and ethnicity. Additionally, students who received need-
based fi nancial assistance were more likely to experience food insecurity, and childhood food 
insecurity was the most signifi cant risk factor for college food insecurity.59
Food insecure students oft en experience diffi  culty concentrating, both in and out of class, 
and college food insecurity can undermine the educational success of many students, oft en lead-
ing to poor academic performance, increased rates of attrition, and delayed graduation.56,59,60 
Research at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, found that 80% of respondents indicated 
that food insecurity impacted their class performance and 25% reported dropping a class because 
of fi nances.61
As a means of coping with the overwhelming burden from various fi nancial demands, students 
who are food insecure consume inexpensive, processed, energy-dense foods with signifi cantly 
reduced amount of fruits, vegetables, legumes, dairy, and calcium compared to their counter-
parts.62 Many food insecure college students downsize and/or skip meals to stretch their meal 
budget, resulting in unmet nutritional needs for individuals to sustain a healthy, active life.59 As 
a result of these nutritional shortfalls, students commonly experience physical health problems, 
such as reduced energy levels, headaches, and fatigue along with mental health problems includ-
ing irritability, anger, stress, and depression (see Box 14.1).
Limited knowledge in nutrition and meal planning along with lack of confi dence in food prepa-
ration may also present a challenge to many college students.63 Based on the ACHA-NCHA II 
survey, 48% of students did not receive any nutrition-related information and 67.3% desired such 
information from their universities. Knowledge and confi dence in healthy nutrition practices, 


===PAGE 383===
358 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
such as meal planning and preparation, can improve students’ ability to maintain healthy lifestyle 
practices including healthy eating habits and meal preparation.
Th ough nutrition plays an essential role in physical and mental health due to our body’s needs 
for essential nutrients to maintain daily functions, it is oft en overlooked among college students. 
Young adults attending colleges and universities have an increased risk for malnutrition as they 
are navigating new responsibilities and many are paying bills, obtaining credit, and/or budget-
ing for the fi rst time. Food and nutrition security at colleges and universities is interconnected 
with promoting psychological and physical well-being and academic development of all students. 
Integrating fi nancial well-being, nutrition education, and mental health resources across campus 
will foster student well-being and success.
BOX 14.1
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD: TIGHT BUDGET AND LACK OF HEALTHY FOOD 
LEADS TO POOR HEALTH FOR COLLEGE STUDENTS
As a ﬁ rst-generation college student, Kaira never knows if she is going to be able to afford the basic 
necessities of college—books, housing, and food. She received a scholarship that covers the full cost of 
tuition but quickly learned that this amount would not be enough.
Kaira is trying to ﬁ gure out how to make ends meet and budget for the ﬁ rst time. Her family is “mid-
dle-class” and when applying for the FAFSA (the Federal Student Aid Form that qualiﬁ es students for 
federal grants, loans, or work-study programs based on need), she learned that her parents make too 
much money to receive ﬁ nancial assistance. On top of tuition, Kaira still had to pay more than US$4,000 
per semester to live in the residence hall and US$1,500 for a meal plan, amounting to an additional 
US$11,000 per year. Additionally, she needed to pay for books, additional course fees, laundry, profes-
sional clothing, conferences, printer paper, and a number of other unanticipated charges. Her parents 
were able to cover half of those costs, leaving her with no choice but to work part-time. Sometimes, it 
was not enough to pay all the necessary expenses and she had to borrow short-term loans from Cash 
Advance. Kaira was glad she did not to have a car on campus as the price of the parking pass and gas 
would have made things even tighter. However, having no car and using unreliable public transportation 
made it harder for her to buy groceries, including healthy foods that are not accessible on campus. 
Furthermore, she did not have a lot of time in between classes, extracurricular activities, and her part-
time job.
Cooking in the residence hall kitchen facility and planning meals was also new to her. As her ﬁ rst 
year progressed, she found herself skipping dinner, breakfast, and sometimes both, based on what she 
could afford with her meal plan. Sometimes, she chose to eat cheap, processed foods because it was 
convenient for her schedule, especially with limited hours of campus dining facilities. Kaira began to feel 
overwhelmed, irritated, and stressed, making it very difﬁ cult for her to concentrate on her studies. She 
had frequent headaches whenever she skipped meals and drank water to suppress hunger. During her 
ﬁ rst year, she started performing poorly in all her classes and the security of her scholarship was then 
threatened because of her low GPA. Kaira felt that, “I was letting my family down. I had worked so hard 
to earn scholarships so that the stress of ﬁ nances was not an issue, but it still was.” The stress of not 
being able to afford books and food, constant headaches from skipping meals, and depression led her to 
consider leaving the university after her ﬁ rst year.


===PAGE 384===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
359
NUTRITIONAL NEEDS AND HEALTH CONDITIONS WHILE AGING
By the year 2050, the number of older adults, aged 65 and over, will exceed 1.2 billion and reach 
22% of the world’s population, outnumbering younger people worldwide.64 Increased longevity 
in adults can largely be attributed to advances in healthcare and public health. In the fi rst half of 
the 20th century, there were large improvements in infant and childhood health, contributing to 
an increase in average life expectancy from 65 to 72 years.65 Maintaining good nutritional status 
is essential for sustaining health, functional independence, and obtaining a good quality of life.
Older Adult Nutrition Needs
Older adults experience changes in dietary needs as metabolism begins to slow and energy 
requirements decrease. A nutrient-dense diet is essential for achieving optimal health:
Water. Th e guidelines for water recommendations include the national standard of eight 
8-ounce glasses per day. Th e less older adults drink, the less thirsty they become. A 
focus on encouraging fl uid consumption will help ensure older adults have adequate 
water to maintain an appropriate body temperature, protect body organs and tissues, 
prevent constipation, lessen the burden on the kidneys, and absorb water-soluble vita-
mins and minerals. Adequate fl uid can be achieved by off ering water during the day by 
placing cups of water easily within reach.
Protein. Adults over the age of 65 have higher protein needs in order to maintain strong 
muscles, balance, and mobility. Protein naturally provides essential amino acids 
that the body needs, such as leucine, that preserves and rebuilds muscle. Excellent 
protein sources are beans and legumes, wild salmon, eggs, Greek yogurt, nuts, and 
seeds. Protein intake should be closely monitored by a healthcare team for those with 
impaired renal function.66
Carbohydrate. Foods containing carbohydrates supply energy to the body and fuel the brain 
and nervous system. Because many older adults can be impacted by constipation, fi ber is 
essential for maintaining gut health and promoting regularity. It also helps lower the risk 
of heart disease and type 2 diabetes. Foods rich in fi ber include whole grain breads and 
cereals, beans, lentils, sweet potatoes, prunes, and peas. Sugars naturally occur in many 
foods (fruit) and are added to processed foods and sweetened beverages. Older adults 
should focus on eating foods with naturally occurring sugars while avoiding added sugar.
Fat. Eating the right kind of fat is critical for maintaining a healthy heart. Attention should 
be placed on foods that are high in healthy fats while limiting foods with saturated and 
trans fats. Healthy, polyunsaturated, and monounsaturated fats can help to lower blood 
cholesterol levels and improve heart health. Saturated fats that should be limited occur 
naturally in many animal sources including fatty beef, pork, cream, butter, cheese, and 
other dairy products made from whole-fat milk.
Micronutrients. Older adults are at greater risk of micronutrient defi ciencies, disproportion-
ately impacting non-Hispanic, black, and low-income older adults (Table 14.3).67
Factors Infl uencing Nutritional Status
Physical Factors
As the body ages, physiological changes occur that can result in a decrease in nutrient and water 
intake, oft en referred to as the anorexia of aging. Taste and smell begin to decline, and many 


===PAGE 385===
360 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
individuals experience a suppressed appetite due to delayed gastric emptying. Poor dentition may 
limit food choices to soft  foods, and dry mouth (xerostomia) can make swallowing diffi  cult.68 
Sensory decline decreases the enjoyment of food, leading to decreased variety and an increase in 
the use of salt and sugar to compensate for fl avor.
Body water content decreases with age and many report a loss of sense of thirst.69 Dehydration 
is associated with more hospital visits and contributes to impaired cognition, falling, and con-
stipation.70 In the United States the avoidable cost of hospitalizations due to dehydration is esti-
mated at approximately US$1 billion annually.71
Individuals also become less physically active and many experience mobility constraints as 
they age. Physical inactivity can worsen quality of life, leading to poor mental health and prema-
ture death. Limited mobility can make it diffi  cult to complete activities of daily living (ADLs), 
such as walking and feeding oneself, and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), such as 
driving, grocery shopping, and preparing meals.
Adults over the age of 70 experience changes in body composition, leading to an increase in fat 
mass and decrease in lean muscle mass.72 Osteopenia is a normal loss of bone density that occurs 
with aging. Th e aging body becomes less effi  cient in utilizing and absorbing nutrients, contribut-
ing to higher levels of nutrient requirements in order to maintain adequate nutrition levels. Some 
medications may also inhibit the absorption of nutrients due to drug-nutrient interactions, most 
commonly impacting fl uid and vitamin B12 levels.
Social Factors
Addressing social determinants of health (SDOH) is a critical component of promoting healthy 
aging. Encompassing the social, economic, and environmental factors that can aff ect health and 
quality of life, SDOH-related factors have signifi cant implications for the ability of older adults 
to age in place and live independently. Th ese factors include a stable income, aff ordable housing, 
safe neighborhoods, reliable transportation, social connectedness, adequate food and nutrition, 
and access to medical services.
Financial health is vital for the well-being of older adults. Many are nearing retirement or are 
already on a fi xed income. Of adults surveyed by AARP aged 60 and above, 39% reported living 
TABLE 14.3 MICRONUTRIENT NEEDS OF OLDER ADULTS AND THEIR DIETARY SOURCES
MICRONUTRIENT
ROLE IN THE BODY
DIETARY SOURCES 
Calcium and vitamin 
D
Maintain bone health 
Three servings of calcium-rich foods or beverages 
a day, from fortifi ed cereals, dark green leafy veg-
etables (that is, kale, spinach), milk, fortifi ed plant 
beverages, calcium supplement or multivitamin 
with vitamin D
Vitamin B12
Maintains brain function 
and red blood cells 
Lean meat, fi sh and seafood, fortifi ed cereal, B12 
supplement or multivitamin 
Potassium
Maintains a healthy 
blood pressure (with 
low sodium intake) 
Fruits (bananas, oranges, cantaloupes, apricots), 
vegetables (spinach, broccoli, potatoes, peas, 
mushrooms, cucumbers), beans, prepared foods 
with little or no added salt (add fl avor with herbs 
and spices) 
Source: Data from Weimer JR. Many elderly at nutritional risk. USDA Food Rev. 1997;20(1):42–48.


===PAGE 386===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
361
in low-income households and 20% found it somewhat or very diffi  cult to pay their monthly liv-
ing expenses. Nearly 40% expressed concern about being able to stay in their home as they age.73 
Minority older adults, such as those with an African-American or Hispanic ethnicity, have higher 
rates of health problems, such as hypertension, diseases of the circulatory system, and diabetes, 
than do Whites.74
Th ose with lower socioeconomic status have reportedly poorer diets. As of 2017, 7.7% of older 
adults, or 5.5 million individuals, reported food insecurity and 22% report making trade-off s 
between food and other basic needs. While food may be available, older adults experience sig-
nifi cant challenges in accessing aff ordable, healthy food. High medical expenses and the cost of 
housing can compete with available resources for food. Food purchased may not provide the 
nutrients necessary to maintain a good quality of life, and this population reports skipping meals 
oft en. Loss of mobility may aff ect their ability to utilize food in order to prepare balanced meals.
Social isolation is very common in the aging population and worsens the risk for developing 
other health conditions. More than one in fi ve older adults report feeling lonely frequently or 
oft en. Th ose with lower incomes are at greater risk of being socially isolated and are almost twice 
as likely to report relationship dissatisfaction. Th is could be the result of living alone, lack of inter-
actions with others during mealtime, and insuffi  cient transportation.
Chronic Conditions and Disease Trends in Older Adults
Th e prevalence of chronic conditions among adults over 65 years of age is increasing due to high 
rates of obesity and diabetes. It is estimated that 91% of older adults have at least one chronic 
health condition and 77% have multiple chronic diseases.75,76 Th e most common causes of death 
among older adults are cancer and cardiovascular disease. Over one third of all deaths are the 
result of heart disease, and hypertension is a major contributor that involves abnormally high 
blood pressure and is the most common chronic disease among adults over 65 years of age.77
Th e second most common chronic condition is osteoarthritis, associated with high levels of 
chronic pain and disability. More than half of the adults over the age of 85 have osteoarthritis, 
with women aff ected more commonly than men. Owing to high rates of obesity, the rate of severe 
hip and knee arthritis continues to increase as the overweight population ages. Treatments include 
pain management and joint replacement surgery, both with considerable risks. Osteoporosis, a 
severe weakening of bone density, is also common in adults 85 years of age and older, and bone 
density screening is recommended for women over age 65.
As the overweight population ages, the prevalence of diabetes among American older adults 
may increase more than 400% by 2050.78 Diabetes is associated with cardiovascular disease, 
peripheral arterial disease, and peripheral neuropathy, contributing to diabetic foot ulcers and 
amputations. Regular examinations of the legs and feet are important to prevent amputations and 
manage ulcers. Managing diabetes should be individualized, as older adults are particularly at risk 
for hypoglycemia (low drops in blood sugar).
Older adults are at high risk for a stroke, marked by the lack of blood fl ow to the brain, and the 
fourth leading cause of death in the United States.79 Th e most common type of stroke is ischemic 
and is caused by a blood clot or the narrowing of a blood vessel leading to the brain. A transient 
ischemic attack (TIA) is a "mini-stroke" and occurs when the symptoms only last a few minutes 
and then disappear. Older adults can lower their risk of stroke by controlling blood pressure, 
stopping smoking, eff ectively managing diabetes, getting regular exercise, and maintaining good 
cholesterol levels by eating healthy foods.
Approximately one in seven adults over the age of 50 suff er from respiratory diseases that 
restrict the fl ow of air out of the lungs. Common respiratory diseases are asthma and COPD, 


===PAGE 387===
362 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
including emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Smoking is the leading cause of COPD; other 
factors include indoor and outdoor air pollution, low educational level, occupational hazards, 
and infections. Th ere is a common misconception that shortness of breath is a normal part of 
aging and COPD oft en goes untreated. Early diagnosis and treatment can signifi cantly improve 
the quality of life for aging adults. Th e best ways to avoid COPD are to lose weight and stop 
smoking.80
Th e rates of dementia may rise from 47 million in 2015 to 131 million in 2050, exceeding 
estimated costs of US$2 trillion worldwide.81 Dementia is a decline in memory and commonly 
occurs in conjunction with other problems in language, mood, mental health, behavior, and deci-
sion-making, and can lead to an increased irritability, depression, and anxiety. Th e two most 
common types of dementia are Alzheimer’s disease and vascular dementia, due to blockages in 
the brain’s blood vessels. Dementia caused by infections, vitamin defi ciencies, and medications 
can be improved and treatment should be started immediately. In addition, vitamin B12 intake 
and adequate hydration are protective factors against dementia.
Isolation, coupled with the change and loss experienced in older age, may lead to depression, a 
well-known cause of anorexia and weight loss. Later life can be a time of multiple losses through 
retirement, disability, and death of friends and family as well as changes in fi nancial, social, and 
physical health. Approximately one in four older adults experience issues related to mental health, 
including both depression and anxiety.
Addressing Malnutrition to Achieve Optimal Nutritional Status
Th e National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) estimates that 16% of com-
munity-dwelling Americans older than 65 years consume fewer than 1,000 calories per day, plac-
ing them at high risk for undernutrition.82 Undernutrition and unintentional weight loss can lead 
to a weakened immune system, infections, poor wound healing, higher risk of hospitalization, 
and increased risk of death. Th e loss of muscle mass, or sarcopenia, is attributed to inadequate 
protein intake and can lead to falls and fractures.
Individual Approaches
Improving nutritional status for aging individuals begins with assessing weight and functional 
status, dietary intake, medical history, and the current living situation (see Box 14.2). A multi- 
disciplinary health care team is the most eff ective approach, including family members or caregiv-
ers. Obtaining an accurate assessment includes:
 
■
Weight status including weight gain or loss, percent of change, and time period
 
■
Learning if the individual is living independently, alone, with family or friends, or in 
an assisted living or skilled nursing facility
 
■
Physical examination including dentition and ability to swallow, gastrointestinal and 
respiratory symptoms
 
■
Mobility status including ability to complete ADLs and IADLS
 
■
Cognitive and neurological conditions, such as depression, anxiety, or dementia
 
■
Intake of food and fl uids over a typical 24-hour period (24-hour dietary recall), meal 
preparation methods, and support for shopping for and preparing meals
 
■
Medical history, including the presence of any chronic diseases
 
■
Current use of medications, multivitamins, or supplements


===PAGE 388===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
363
Interventions for reversing malnutrition need to occur early. It can be eff ective to remove 
dietary restrictions, encourage the use of fl avor enhancers, incorporate frequent small meals 
throughout the day, and off er liquid supplements between meals. While medications should not 
be considered as a primary treatment for malnutrition, adjusting to ones that do not have anorex-
ia-producing side eff ects and using antidepressants that are appetite stimulating can be helpful. 
Social services assessments for the living situation can be essential.84
Community-Based Approaches
Th e United States off ers a variety of health promotion programs and organizations for adults over 
the age of 60. Th e National Council on Aging (NCOA) “improve[s] the lives of millions of older 
adults, especially those who are struggling”124 by providing services that promote well-being and 
maintain independence. Th e NCOA off ers diff erent programs across (a) social, (b) economic, 
(c) legal, and (d) nutrition services.
Meals on Wheels is an example of a well-known program that delivers fresh, healthy meals 
daily to home-bound adults and group feeding sites. Nearly 80% of low-income older adults are 
not receiving the home-delivered meals that they need. Operating in nearly every community in 
America, it addresses the challenges of malnutrition, hunger, and social isolation.
Health promotion services for older adults should be responsive to ethnic and socioeconomic 
diversity. Engaging the community in developing solutions is an eff ective strategy for develop-
ing approaches that are perceived as being accessible and acceptable by the aging population.85 
Participatory approaches that build trustful relationships include involving community health 
workers and members within marginalized groups. Services in disadvantaged areas can be more 
resource-demanding because of the time-consuming nature of both recruitment and delivery.
Older adults are exceptionally vulnerable to malnutrition and dehydration, and their nega-
tive eff ects on health. It is a common misconception that nutritional defi ciencies are an inevita-
ble consequence of aging. Consideration for nutrition status of older adults should be a routine 
part of caring for this population. Mealtime should be an enjoyable experience focused on social 
BOX 14.2
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD: SIMPLE SOLUTIONS TO ADDRESSING 
MALNUTRITION IN OLDER ADULTS
An 85-year-old woman lives independently in a mobile home park. She has a 3-month history of inter-
mittent abdominal pain, nausea, diarrhea, and gradual weight loss. Her daughter lives nearby and would 
prepare meals for her to warm in the microwave oven. The initial medical examination showed no under-
lying cause for the weight loss and abdominal symptoms. The patient was given medication for abdom-
inal discomfort and was encouraged to add over-the-counter nutritional supplements to her daily diet. 
The patient’s condition continued to decline. A referral led to a home visit by a case manager who dis-
covered that the elderly woman’s refrigerator was noisy and had been disturbing her sleep. The woman 
had attempted to address this problem by unplugging the refrigerator each evening at 8 pm when she 
prepared for bed. When informed of this situation, the family replaced the refrigerator, and the abdominal 
symptoms and weight loss subsided.83 


===PAGE 389===
364 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
interaction and incorporating whole grains, fruits, vegetables, fi sh, nuts, lean proteins, and low-
fat dairy while being mindful of the physical changes that occur with age. Identifying and treat-
ing nutrition issues early by listening to the challenges faced by older adults and understanding 
barriers to achieving optimal nutrition can increase longevity, promote good health, and foster 
independence (see Box 14.3).
MALNUTRITION, FOOD INSECURITY, AND HUNGER AND IMPLICATIONS 
FOR HEALTH
Health challenges and consequences associated with the double burden of malnutrition, food 
insecurity, and hunger are intrinsically linked and can be largely attributed to a failure of the food 
system in supplying aff ordable, accessible, and reliable healthful food for all. Th e 1945 Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights recognized the Right to Food, defi ned as the right to feed oneself 
with dignity, as a legal obligation under international law, thus recognizing that adequate food 
for health is not merely a promise to be met through charity but a right to be fulfi lled through 
appropriate actions by governments and nonstate agencies.86 Th e United Nations (UN) recognizes 
that, “[t]he right to adequate food is realized when every man, woman and child, alone or in com-
munity with others, have physical and economic access at all times to adequate food or means 
for its procurement.”125 Th is section connects the dots between malnutrition, food insecurity, and 
hunger and describes a framework for measuring and achieving food and nutrition security.
Food Security Framework
Food and nutrition security is multi-dimensional and comprises four essential components of 
(a) food availability, (b) food access, (c) food utilization, and (d) stability.87
BOX 14.3
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD: INTERGENERATIONAL MENTORING PROGRAM 
DECREASES ISOLATION AND ENCOURAGES HEALTHY EATING IN OLDER 
ADULTS
An Intergenerational Mentoring Program was established to promote healthy eating, community engage-
ment, and environmental sustainability while focusing on improving social cohesion and food security in 
a community in Kentucky. One evening a week, a group of college students and older adults gather at a 
community center that is walking distance to the older adults’ homes where they cook meals from recov-
ered food. The older adults take a bag of groceries home that include fresh fruits and vegetables and dairy 
products. Of the older adults served, 92% expressed a decrease in isolation and 60% ate/drank more fruits, 
vegetables, whole grains, and water as a result of this program. Meal recipients shared, “I now eat better 
and made new friends.” As a result of the program, the same group of older adults began weekly walks 
together and shared rides to the doctor and grocery store. The manager at the housing authority shared, 
“Most of the individuals that attend the program lived in the same building or next door to each other but 
they had never met one another. The relationships that the individuals built with one another is irreplaceable. 
They feel conﬁ dent knowing that they have someone to turn to.” The Intergenerational Mentoring Program 
effectively leveraged the power of the university to improve food security and health for older adults. 


===PAGE 390===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
365
Availability is an essential precursor for access, aff ordability, and utilization. As defi ned by the 
World Food Programme, “Food availability is the amount of food that is present in a country or 
area through all forms of domestic production, imports, food stocks and food aid.”88 Availability 
is dependent upon food and agricultural production in a region. Among the countries where 
adverse impacts of economic downturns on food security have been the strongest, the majority 
rely heavily on commodity exports and/or imports to supply food.
Access includes the physical, economic, and social means of obtaining food. Lack of physical 
access is illustrated by a scenario in which food is being produced, but not distributed appro-
priately, owing to ineffi  ciency or lack of infrastructure. Market systems and community buying 
power are a vital component in considering the economics of food access as described, “Even 
in rural areas, most people, and especially the poor, rely on market systems to provide food and 
essential goods and services but also for selling their produce.”89 Specifi cally, urban, peri-urban, or 
rural low-resource communities have limited physical access to food because of a lack of full-ser-
vice supermarkets or grocery stores. Finally, food may not be accessible to a particular social 
group or gender. For example, predominantly black or Hispanic neighborhoods are shown to 
have fewer full-service supermarkets than their White counterparts.90
Utilization is both the way in which the body makes use of the nutrients in the food and the 
household’s food safety and preparation practices. Based on the World Food Summit, utilization 
includes having “safe, nutritious foods that meet dietary needs of all individuals.”91 Understanding 
healthy food selection, preparation, storage, and sanitation are needed to ensure adequate utiliza-
tion. For example, food may be available or present in a country, as well as physically, socially, and 
economically accessible; however, if the household does not know how to cook healthy food, then 
food and nutrition insecurity may still exist.
Finally, stability of food availability, access, and utilization at all times is necessary to achieve 
nutrition security. Scenarios that can disrupt stability include poverty, unemployment, increased 
food costs, adverse changes in climate, public safety situations, and political conditions.
Connecting Food Security and Health
An integral component of the multi-dimensional nature of food security is its implications for 
nutritional status. As previously mentioned, food insecurity can lead to malnutrition and poor 
health through decreased eating of healthful food, increased risk of diet-related chronic diseases, 
poor mental health, depression, stress, anxiety, social exclusion, academic barriers, and increased 
healthcare costs.92
A number of research studies show a positive association between food insecurity and diet- 
related chronic diseases.93 Fift y-eight percent of low or very low food secure households contain 
at least one member with high blood pressure and 33% have at least one member with diabetes.94 
Obesity and hunger may exist side by side within the same household or community, commonly 
known as the hunger-obesity paradox. Owing to limited fi nancial resources, households that 
are food insecure use coping strategies that compromise health:
 
■
Choosing cheaper food even though they know it is not the healthiest
 
■
Forgoing the foods needed for special medical diets (e.g., diabetic diets)
 
■
Making trade-off s between food and other basic necessities (e.g., housing)
 
■
Engaging in cost-related medication underuse
 
■
Postponing preventive or needed medical care


===PAGE 391===
366 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Causes associated with the hunger-obesity paradox are the result of low-income households 
facing unique challenges to adopting and maintaining healthful behaviors. Th e cycle of food inse-
curity and chronic disease begins when an individual or household has a lack of availability or 
physical access to healthy, aff ordable foods. Owing to the absence of full-service grocery stores 
and farmers’ markets, residents may be forced to access food at convenience stores or gas stations, 
where fresh food and healthful options are limited or not present.
Low-resource households are less likely to have and use their own vehicle for regular food 
shopping;95 thereby limiting purchases because of how much can be carried when walking or 
when using public transit or the length of time between shopping trips. For example, household 
shoppers without stable transportation may only go to a full-scale supermarket once a month and 
will purchase fewer perishable foods, such as fresh produce.96
When these households have the physical means of accessing healthy food, the more healthful 
options, like fresh produce, are perceived to be more expensive and possess a higher potential 
for waste.97 Energy-dense, convenience foods that are fi lled with added sugars, fats, and refi ned 
grains are more popular with lower resource households because of lower cost. Th ese foods are 
also lower in nutritional quality, contributing to an overconsumption of calories and resulting in 
weight gain and obesity.98
In addition to the decrease in the availability of aff ordable healthful foods, low-resource com-
munities have a higher density of fast-food restaurants.99 Th ese restaurants predominantly off er a 
variety of energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods at relatively low prices. Research shows a diet rich in 
these foods is associated with weight gain and diet-related diseases.100,101
Th e fi nancial and emotional pressures of food insecurity, coupled with low wage work, limited 
healthcare, inadequate transportation, poor housing, and neighborhood violence, contribute to 
extremely high levels of stress and poor mental health for these households. Research has linked 
stress and poor mental health to weight gain and obesity through stress-induced hormonal and 
metabolic changes.102
Environmental barriers to physical activity present signifi cant challenges for low-resource com-
munities. Th ere are fewer parks, green spaces, and recreational facilities in lower income neigh-
borhoods compared to their higher income counterparts.103 When physical activity resources are 
available, they oft en have fewer natural features (e.g., trees) in addition to more trash and signs of 
damage.104 Safety concerns are common barriers to being physically active. Because of neighbor-
hood crime, children and adults are more likely to stay inside and engage in sedentary activities 
(e.g., television, video games).
Marketing and advertising for obesity-promoting products that encourage the consumption 
of energy-dense, unhealthful foods disproportionately impacts low-resource communities.105,106 
Th is type of marketing is shown to have an infl uence on the diet and contribute to obesity in 
youth and young adults.
Measurements of Food Security Status
Th e U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) utilizes a tiered approach to measure food security 
status of American households:
Food Secure
 
■
High food security: No problems or anxiety about consistently accessing adequate 
food
 
■
Marginal food security: Problems or anxiety at times about accessing adequate food, 
but the quality, variety, and quantity of food were not substantially reduced


===PAGE 392===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
367
Food Insecure
 
■
Low food security: Reduced quality, variety, and desirability of diets, but the quantity 
of food intake and normal eating patterns were not substantially disrupted
Hungry
 
■
Very low food security: At times during the year, eating patterns of one or more house-
hold members were disrupted and food intake reduced because the household lacked 
money or other resources for food
Food security status is determined by a household’s economic ability to aff ord food. Th e U.S. Food 
Security Survey Module developed by the USDA Economic Research Service (ERS) asks if, in 
the last 12 months, the household cut the size of meals, skipped meals, ate less than they should, 
or went hungry because there was not enough money for food.107 Th e risk for food insecurity 
increases when money to buy food is limited or not available. Th e most prevalent risk factor for 
food insecurity is poverty (Figure 14.4).108
Applying the Social-Ecological Model to the Food Insecurity Multidimensional 
Index (FIMI) to Promote Health Across the Life span
Th e Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)’s Food Insecurity Multidimensional Index (FIMI) 
can be applied to all levels of the social-ecological model, including the macro (large national 
and legal systems), meso (organizations, communities, and ethnic groups), and micro (families, 
relationships, and individuals) levels (Figure 14.5).
Availability
Food and nutrition cannot be considered without also thinking about farming and agriculture. 
Enough nutrient-dense food is produced and there is suffi  cient capacity in the world to feed the 
world’s population, now and in the future. Resilient small-scale farms that yield nutrient-dense 
crops (fruits and vegetables) are integral to a nation’s food supply. Th e share of small-scale food 
producers compared to all producers ranges from 40% to 85% in Africa, Asia, and Latin America, 
10% in Europe, and 2% in Germany, Denmark, France, and the Netherlands. Th e United States 
has experienced a rapid decline in small-scale farms and the production of labor-intensive crops 
on domestic soil; thus, foreign-grown produce consumed in the United States has increased nearly 
FIGURE 14.4 Poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition, and hunger are interrelated.
Poor
physical
health
Low
employment
status
Poverty
Food
insecurity,
malnutrition,
hunger


===PAGE 393===
368 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
80%. During this time, if domestic farms maintained their market share of vegetable production, 
farm communities would have experienced an economic boost of US$4.9 billion, resulting in 
89,000 jobs and raising the U.S. gross domestic product by US$12.4 billion in 1 year.109
Assessed at the macro (policy) and meso (community) levels, global government spending 
on agriculture and food production impact food availability. Spending typically prioritizes staple 
crops, such as corn, soybeans, rice, wheat, maize, and sugar cane, off ering little to no nutritional 
value.110 One of the largest portions of the U.S. Agriculture Adjustment Act (commonly known as 
the Farm Bill, the primary agricultural and food policy tool of the federal government) includes 
subsidies that artifi cially decrease the cost of commodities—wheat, corn, soybeans, tobacco, live-
stock and dairy—accounting for US$23 billion per year. Th e majority of subsidies support com-
mercial farmers who have an average income of nearly US$200,000 and net worth just under 
US$2 million. While corn accounts for more than a quarter of the subsidy payments,111 more than 
one-third of the U.S. corn crop is used to feed livestock, 13% is exported, 40% is used to produce 
ethanol, 9% is for plastics, 3% is for inputs including high-fructose corn syrup and corn oil, and 
less than 0.5% of the corn crop is used as food in the form of “sweet corn.”112 Some argue that sus-
tainable, regenerative agriculture practices that support small-scale farms, diversify production, 
and strengthen resiliency (climate variability, natural disasters, or economic shocks) will contrib-
ute to improving dietary quality and overall health.113
Mitigating food waste is another contributing factor, as up to 40% of food in the United States 
goes uneaten. Th is preventable loss has profound eff ects on food security, the environment, and 
economy. Food waste is estimated to cost US$218 billion annually, approximately US$1,800 for 
a four-person American household. Interventions that reduce pre-consumer waste, on farms, in 
FIGURE 14.5 The social-ecological model (left) and corresponding food insecurity 
multidimensional index (right).
Individual
micro-level
knowledge,
attitudes,
behaviors
Interpersonal
micro-level
families, friends, and
social networks
Community
meso-level
relationships between
organizations
Organizational
meso-level
organizations and social
institutions
Policy
macro-level
national, state, local laws
Food availability and stability
Food availability and access
Food access
Food access and utilization
Food utilization


===PAGE 394===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
369
distribution and preparation, involve recovering and repurposing food. Th e Bill Emerson Good 
Samaritan Act protects food donors, including restaurants, institutions, and individuals, from 
liability when food is donated in all 50 states. Post-consumer waste, commonly known as “plate 
waste,” is discarded by consumers at the time of consumption and can be mitigated by decreasing 
portion sizes, removing trays from “all-you-can-eat” buff ets, and increasing awareness through 
demonstrations. Waste management practices in food service establishments should follow the 
Food Waste Hierarchy of (a) source reduction, (b) reuse to feed people, (c) reuse to feed animals, 
(d) reuse for industrial uses, (e) compost, and fi nally (f) contribute to a landfi ll.114
Access
Increasing access points to purchase fruits and vegetables is a method to promote healthful food 
consumption for all age groups. Typically assessed at the meso-level (community or organiza-
tional), research indicates that farmers’ markets are associated with higher consumption of fruit 
and vegetables.115 According to the USDA’s Agricultural Marketing Service, consumer demand 
for locally sourced food continues to grow, contributing to an increase in the number of farmers’ 
markets by 78% in one decade. Community-supported agriculture (CSA) is another method that 
increases consumption of healthy food while connecting consumers directly with farmers and 
involves purchasing a share from the farm in advance of the growing season. Financial incentives 
to join a CSA through "produce prescriptions" have been shown to eff ectively mitigate the con-
sumer upfront cost and improve short- and long-term health outcomes.116
Various research studies sought to identify the barriers to intake and found that consum-
ers reported price as a primary challenge to adequate consumption.21 Governmental agencies 
off er safety-net programs that ensure adequate access to food for low-resource populations 
(Table 14.4).
According to the USDA, the majority of SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) 
households and those receiving free or reduced-price school lunches, experienced food secu-
rity while enrolled.117 Rewards-based incentive programs for fruit and vegetable purchases, such 
as farmers’ market incentive programs for WIC (Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants, and Children) or SNAP participants, are shown to address the dual challenge of 
food insecurity and malnutrition.118 Th e USDA off ers funding opportunities that support projects 
dedicated to increasing fruit and vegetable access among low-income consumers, including:
 
■
Engaging public-private eff orts to incentivize fruit and vegetable purchases with 
“point-of-sale double dollars” at food access points, including the Kentucky Double 
Dollars program that doubles the purchasing power of participants of SNAP, WIC, and 
the Seniors Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program
 
■
Making fresh fruits and vegetables more accessible to low-income families through 
grants to help farmers' markets install and operate electronic benefi t transfer (EBT) 
card readers
 
■
Gathering stakeholder input on stricter “depth of stock” requirements for SNAP retail-
ers to better determine how to improve program integrity and expand the availability 
of more healthful foods to SNAP recipients, without compromising access to food for 
SNAP participants or unnecessarily burdening retailers that redeem SNAP benefi ts.
 
■
Th e Healthy Incentives Pilot, designed to test the impact of incentivizing fruit and veg-
etable purchases among SNAP recipients that showed relatively small ongoing invest-
ment result in a 25% increase in fruit and vegetable consumption among adults.123 


===PAGE 395===
370 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Utilization
Food utilization is assessed at the individual level and focuses on nutritional quality of food, in 
addition to personal food safety, storage, and preparation practices. Th e current food system off ers 
an increased risk for food contamination owing to the distance between producers and consumers 
continuing to grow. Th e Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that one in six 
Americans get sick, 128,000 are hospitalized, and 3,000 die from foodborne diseases each year.119 
Th ere are oft en confl icts between food safety regulation and the cost of compliance for smallholder 
farmers, as stringent standards make it prohibitive for small-scale producers to enter markets and 
safe food that is inevitably monitored becomes less accessible to low-income consumers.
Nutrition education programs rooted in behavior change theory and human-centered design (a 
process that begins with the people in order to develop solutions that are tailored to their needs) 
are shown to be eff ective in addressing household food practices. For example, Cooking Matters®, 
a nutrition education program of Share Our Strength, empowers parents, caregivers, families, 
TABLE 14.4 FEDERAL FOOD ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES
ACRONYM
FULL NAME
DESCRIPTION
POPULATION SERVED
SNAP
Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance 
Program
Provides temporary benefi ts to 
low-income Americans to buy 
groceries
All age groups from 
infancy through older 
adults
TEFAP
The Emergency 
Food Assistance 
Program
Provides U.S. Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) commodi-
ties to families in need of short-
term hunger relief through 
emergency food providers like 
food banks
All ages including those 
supplied through the 
national food bank 
network 
CSFP
The Commodity 
Supplemental Food 
Program
Provides food assistance for 
low-income seniors through 
a monthly package of USDA 
commodities
All ages including supply-
ing through the national 
food bank network 
CACFP
The Child and Adult 
Care Food Program
Provides prepared nutritious 
meals and snacks to children 
and adults in designated child 
and adult care centers
Predominately for children 
(<5 years) and older adults 
NSLP
The National School 
Lunch Program
Provides prepared nutritious 
lunch to qualifi ed children 
during the school year
Predominately for school-
age children (5–18 years) 
SBP
The School Breakfast 
Program
Provides prepared nutritious 
breakfast to qualifi ed children 
during the school year
Predominately for school-
age children (5–18 years)
SFSP
The Summer Food 
Service Program
Provides prepared nutritious 
meals and snacks to qualifi ed 
children during the summer
Predominately for school-
age children (5–18 years)
WIC
Special Supplemental 
Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants, and 
Children
A prescriptive, nonentitlement 
program that supplies nutritious 
foods for proper growth and 
development 
Pregnant and lactating 
women, infants, and 
children


===PAGE 396===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
371
and children with the skills, knowledge, and confi dence to shop for and cook healthy, aff ordable 
meals. Th e USDA continues to explore programs that eff ectively encourage the consumption of 
healthy foods, such as SNAP-Ed that off ers strong nutrition education to change food behav-
ior and improve health, specifi cally improving fruit and vegetable consumption for children and 
older adults, and providing shopping strategies and meal planning advice to help families serve 
more nutritious meals aff ordably through its 10-Tips Nutrition Series and the Th rift y Food Plan.
Stability
Ensuring that food is available, accessible, and utilized “at all times,” while addressing the inter-
connectedness of malnutrition, food insecurity, and hunger, involves policies that tackle systemic 
problems within the overall food system.120 According to the UN, nations not supplying adequate 
food and nutrition services are violating international law. Th e second Sustainable Development 
Goal highlights the need for integration of global policy priorities in order to end hunger, achieve 
food security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture.121
CONCLUSION
Malnutrition, food insecurity, and hunger all too oft en occur within the same communities 
and households. Largely because of a lack of fi nancial resources, food insecure communities 
experience economic and environmental challenges to living a healthy life. Achieving optimal 
nutritional status is possible through food (a) availability, (b) accessibility, (c) utilization, and 
(d) stability. Ensuring the presence of these four components will lead to a food and nutrition 
secure community in which all residents can obtain a safe, culturally acceptable, nutritionally ade-
quate diet through a sustainable food system that maximizes community self-reliance, social jus-
tice, and democratic decision-making.130
Encompassing both overnutrition and undernutrition, malnutrition is a global problem with 
such consequences as chronic diseases, poor child development, early mortality, and lack of 
economic productivity. All people must have suffi  cient physical, economic, and social access to 
healthful food at all times. Th e right to feed oneself with dignity is a legal obligation under inter-
national law. Adequate food for health is not merely a promise to be met through charity; it is one 
to be fulfi lled through appropriate actions by governments and nonstate agencies. Social, eco-
nomic, and environmental factors have a profound impact on nutrition-related health outcomes 
across the life span and call for integrated, system-based approaches.
KEY CONCEPTS
 
■
Th e double burden of malnutrition, both undernutrition and overnutrition, is the larg-
est single contributor to disease in the world and is an increasing challenge for women 
of childbearing age.
 
■
Progress in reducing global mortality from disease has stalled or reversed primarily 
because of the increasing prevalence of NCDs, such as overweight and obesity, type 2 
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, chronic respiratory disease, and certain types of cancers.
 
■
Anorexia of aging is a common physical factor that contributes to malnutrition in 
older adults; however, it is preventable by addressing the social, economic, and envi-
ronmental factors that promote quality of life and self-suffi  ciency.


===PAGE 397===
372 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
 
■
While investments in nutrition interventions and education are important, they should 
be integrated across the social-ecological model to accelerate progress toward good 
health.
 
■
Food waste is a preventable loss that impacts the environment, economic viability, and 
food and nutrition security. Recovering and repurposing food play a critical role in 
mitigating food waste and improving population nutritional status.
 
■
Sustainable, regenerative agriculture practices that support small-scale farms, diversify 
production, and strengthen resiliency (climate variability, natural disasters, or eco-
nomic shocks) can contribute to food and nutrition security.
CASE STUDY: CHALLENGES FACED BY SINGLE MOTHER 
OF THREE
Jack, a 3-year-old boy, lives with his mother and two older siblings (4 and 7 years old). It is a 
25-minute bus ride from their apartment to the WIC offi  ce or grocery store. Mom is single and 
makes about US$2,000 per month. Jack and his 4-year-old sibling are receiving WIC benefi ts. 
Th e oldest sibling, a 7-year-old girl, was on WIC until she aged out of the program at 5 years. She 
has always plotted in the 90th to 95th percentile in weight-for-age and BMI consistent at the 75th 
percentile, whereas Jack plots below the 3rd percentile and has triggered in the WIC system as 
“high risk” for malnutrition.
Seattle has been growing its technology industry, which has put pressure on the housing mar-
ket, and the family had to relocate last year because of the rise in rent for their two-bedroom 
apartment. Th e new apartment has one bedroom; the older children share the bedroom. Mom 
and Jack sleep on a pull-out couch in the living room. Th e apartment has an effi  ciency kitchen. 
Mom has complained to the landlord about mold around the windows and is concerned with the 
frequency of ear infections for the older children and her persistent cough, but there are no other 
housing options.
Mom reports consistently using the WIC money to purchase food for the children and admits 
she gives the food to all the children as it is “too hard to tell one of them not to eat this food or that 
food when everyone is hungry.” Her SNAP benefi ts change with her work schedule and unpre-
dictable child-support payments and they rely on the nearest food pantry during the last week of 
the month. Last summer, the family received US$35 in WIC farmers’ market vouchers, of which 
she was able to spend US$20. In June, she hopes to fi nd an eligible farmer’s market closer to their 
apartment.
She states mealtimes are the hardest time of day for her because her oldest daughter fi nishes 
her plate and will also eat any food left  on the plates of her younger siblings. Mom says she is very 
happy to see her older daughter eating and praises her for eating so well at each meal. Mom strug-
gles to get Jack to eat anything at mealtime and she has force-fed him many times to make sure he 
ate something that day. Mom has become so frustrated lately that she now makes three evening 
meals, one for each child, in an attempt to appease them all and get Jack to eat. She has tried to 
get a “routine” down, but struggles because of changes in her work schedule, children getting sick, 
commute from day care and school to home, and exhaustion.
Mom gets up at 3:00 am each day to go to her fi rst minimum wage job. She wakes the chil-
dren by 3:30 am and they are in day care near the school from 4:00 am until 6:00 pm at night 
when she gets off  her second job. Day care has set mealtimes, schedules, and foods and the 


===PAGE 398===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
373
oldest daughter receives free breakfast and lunch at school. Mom reports that Jack does not eat 
well at day care either.
Access and time to shop for foods is a challenge for mom. Th e closest grocery store, food pan-
try, and WIC offi  ce to their neighborhood is a 30-minute bus ride. Th e WIC offi  ce is open from 8 
am to 4 pm, Monday to Wednesday and Friday, and from 8:00 am to 5:45 pm on Th ursdays. She 
is worried about using the coupons at the market as her fi rst and only experience at the market 
proved stressful and overwhelming. She was not familiar with how to shop at the market, did not 
bring her own bags, heard some customers make side comments about her WIC coins, and when 
she arrived home, she did not know how to cook or prepare some of the vegetables. Mom under-
stands the importance of having the children eat a more diverse variety of vegetables but struggles 
with overcoming the barriers.
Over the past few weeks, Jack has begun to drink more milk, so mom has off ered this to him 
any time she can throughout the day and encouraged day care to “continually off er him milk” as 
she sees this as some type of nutrition he is getting if he will not eat. Mom is happy that Jack is 
drinking milk. She used to feel guilty wasting it because the family receives so much of it through 
WIC; it had been a challenge to consume it before it spoiled.
At the most recent WIC appointment, Jack’s hemoglobin was <10 mg/dL and he was diag-
nosed with anemia in addition to being at high risk for malnutrition. Mom is encouraged to feed 
him more red meat each day to help bring up his iron stores and to reduce the amount of milk he 
is drinking as the milk may be a substitute for food.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Each of us has an individual perspective of the world and this impacts our awareness 
of diff erent situations and relationships. Refl ecting on your worldview, what are some 
ways your perspective impacts your understanding of the family situation, challenges, 
and barriers in this case study?
2. 
Th inking about the WIC Farmers’ Market Program, what are some food availability 
(agricultural) impacts? What are social/cultural food access impacts?
3. 
Th inking about the recommendation by the WIC clinician for Jack’s mom to increase 
his red meat consumption to improve his anemia, what are the barriers, challenges, 
and impacts of this recommendation? In what ways does food utilization play a role?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
Activity #1: Film Showing and Refl ection
Th e fi lm A Place at the Table introduces the notion that food is a right, not only a need. Watch the 
fi lm and write a refl ection paper discussing:
 
■
What does the fi lm say about food being a basic human right? Provide some clear 
examples.
 
■
What does the fi lm say about the role of agricultural subsidies and their impact on U.S. 
food security?
 
■
How can we end hunger? Describe two examples from the fi lm.
 
■
Refl ect on how this information relates to your future career goals.


===PAGE 399===
374 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Activity #2: Applying Chapter 14 Key Concepts to a Community-Based Case 
Study
1. 
Review the following Activity #2 Case Example.
2. 
Discuss the following questions (in a group/class discussion or an individual/refl ection 
paper):
 
■
In what ways does Fresh Stop address nutrition-related health issues and chal-
lenges across the lifespan?
 
■
Does this model strengthen the resiliency and capacity of small-scale vegetable 
farms?
 
■
How do Fresh Stop Markets address the three-pillars of food access (social, physi-
cal, and economic)?
 
■
Agency is an important factor in considering food availability, access, and utiliza-
tion. Does this model support food choice and democratic decision-making?
 
■
Food cooperatives, such as Fresh Stop, are not a new approach to ensuring food 
access. While the model is piloted in the United States, how could it be replicated 
across the globe?
 
■
Is this a sustainable approach? What are ways that government and nongovern-
ment agencies can use this model to promote community food and nutrition 
security?
Activity #2 Case Example
Anna, a 65-year-old woman, is responsible for the care of her two grandchildren (4 and 7 years 
old). Her daughter, the children’s mother, has opioid use disorder. Anna recently gained custody 
of the grandchildren and they are now living in Anna’s one-bedroom apartment. Recently retired, 
Anna has a fi xed income of about US$1,900 per month and receives US$16 per month in SNAP 
benefi ts.
Since she was 18 years old, Anna worked as a cook at a nearby restaurant and she prides her-
self on her cooking ability. Recently, her knees have started “giving me trouble” and she cannot 
stand for long periods of time. She has type 2 diabetes and the medical cost of doctor’s visits and 
medications have put a strain on her fi nances. Her doctor is constantly telling her to lose weight.
Th ere is a store on the corner where she can buy some food; however, despite her numerous 
requests, bananas are the only fresh food option. About once a month, she takes the bus to the 
nearest full-scale supermarket that is 40 minutes away, round-trip. Even with Anna’s cooking 
knowledge, she struggles to make meals that she knows are good for their health and that both 
kids will eat.
While attending a children’s event at the community center, she heard about a group trying to 
bring more fresh food options into their neighborhood. She was hesitant to attend the meeting 
the following evening because she was feeling drained and exhausted. Th e meeting off ered dinner 
and childcare, so she decided to attend and felt that she had “nothing to lose.” At the meeting, she 
learned about Fresh Stop, which pulls the community resources together to buy fresh produce 
from fruit and vegetable farms around the area. Anna also met another single grandparent caring 
for her grandchildren and, for the fi rst time, did not feel so alone.
Anna walked with the kids to the fi rst market and was surprised to see all the beautiful fruits 
and vegetables displayed. Th e market included activities for the kids and a chef was demonstrating 


===PAGE 400===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
375
how to make a stir-fry from some of that day’s vegetables. With her SNAP benefi ts, Anna bought 
one fresh produce share and got a voucher for another free share, providing an entire month's 
supply of fresh fruits and vegetables for only US$10.
Over the course of the summer, Anna shared, “My knees no longer bother me and I am able 
to walk with my friends. Th e only change I made was eating the food from here.” Anna lost 45 
pounds that summer and eliminated her diabetic medication, essentially curing her diabetes.
Fresh Stop Markets off ers opportunities to provide aff ordable access to fresh, local fruits and 
vegetables for low-income citizens, while supporting the economics of small farmers and 
fostering relationships within neighborhoods. Customers can pay a discounted price with 
subsidized Double Dollars vouchers with WIC and SNAP, ranging from US$0 to US$25 
(for a two-week produce share). Produce is provided from a cooperative group of farmers 
at prices above wholesale, providing farmers with a guaranteed market without the stress of 
supplying an entire CSA share. In one year, Fresh Stop connects 1,400 unique families (4,200 
individuals) with farm-fresh produce grown by 50 local farmers. Community food projects 
like the Fresh Stop Market bridge the gap between food insecure eaters and resource stressed 
local farmers—addressing food, farm, and nutrition issues.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
What are the essential nutrients for all age groups?
2. 
How does the double burden of malnutrition impact the economic viability of a 
nation?
3. 
Is food and nutrition security a national security issue? Please describe.
4. 
What are the primary nutrition considerations for pregnant women?
5. 
Th inking beyond food access, what role does food security play in educational attain-
ment? Alleviating the cycle of poverty?
6. 
How do social determinants of health impact disease progression through the life span?
7. 
Who holds the primary responsibility of ensuring food for all? Should this be 
addressed at the local, state, national, international level? By government or private 
agencies?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
RESOURCE
DESCRIPTION
WEBSITE LINK
USDA 
ChooseMyPlate
Provides practical information to individuals, 
health professionals, nutrition educators, 
and the food industry to help individuals 
fi nd their healthy eating style and build it 
throughout their lifetime. 
www.choosemyplate.gov
USDA Lifecycle 
Nutrition
Information about proper nutrition from 
preconception through older adults. 
www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/
lifecycle-nutrition-0


===PAGE 401===
376 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
RESOURCE
DESCRIPTION
WEBSITE LINK
Sustainable 
Development 
Goals 
A call for action by all UN countries—poor, 
rich and middle-income—to promote pros-
perity while protecting the environment. 
sustainabledevelopment.un
.org
First Thousand 
Days 
The leading nonprofi t organization working 
in the United States and around the world 
to ensure women and children have the 
healthiest fi rst 1,000 days.
thousanddays.org/why-1000
-days
The Hope Center
Home to an action research team using 
rigorous research to drive innovative 
practice, evidence-based policy-making, 
and effective communications to support 
#RealCollege students.
hope4college.com
The Body Project
A group-based intervention that provides 
a forum for women and girls to confront 
unrealistic beauty ideals and engages them 
in the development of healthy body image 
through verbal, written, and behavioral 
exercises.
www.nationaleatingdisorders
.org/get-involved/the-body-project
Healthy Campus
“Sister document” to Healthy People, 
and much of the development process for 
Healthy Campus 2020 was guided by the 
Healthy People framework.
www.acha.org/healthycampus
Food and 
Agriculture 
Organization 
(FAO), High 
Level Panel of 
Experts
The High Level Panel of Experts (HLPE) on 
food security and nutrition has been created 
as part of the reform of the international 
governance of food security to advise the 
Committee on World Food Security (CFS).
www.fao.org/cfs/cfs-hlpe/reports/
en
Nutrition and Food Systems: www.
fao.org/3/a-i7846e.pdf
Feeding 
America, Hunger 
+ Health 
Educate, connect, and engage cross-sector 
professionals at the intersection of food 
insecurity, nutrition, and health. 
hungerandhealth.feeding
america.org
Academy of 
Nutrition and 
Dietetics, Future 
of Food Initiative
Positioning the Academy and its members 
to address the issues of global food security, 
hunger, and malnutrition.
eatrightfoundation.org/why-it
-matters/public-education/future
-of-food
GLOSSARY
Activities of daily living (ADLs): Basic self-care tasks, such as walking and feeding oneself, 
that one encounters on a daily basis.
Body mass index (BMI): A measurement that can be used to screen for weight categories that 
may contribute to health problems. BMI is not a direct diagnostic of the body fatness or health 
of an individual and is calculated as Weight (kg)/height (m)2.
Communicable diseases: Also known as infectious diseases; illnesses that result from infec-
tion, presence and growth of pathogenic biological agents.
Food insecurity: Lack of consistent access to enough food for an active, healthy life.


===PAGE 402===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
377
Food system: The path that food travels from field to fork that includes the growing, 
harvesting, processing, packaging, transporting, marketing, consuming, and disposing of 
food.
Hunger-obesity paradox: Occurrence of high rates of obesity among individuals with low 
resources due to a lack of access to healthy food.
Instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs): Activities, such as driving, grocery shopping, 
and preparing meals, that require complex thinking and organizational skills.
Macro- and micronutrients: Macronutrients refer to the carbohydrates, fats, and protein nec-
essary for the basic components of a healthy diet. Micronutrients include the essential nutri-
ents, such as vitamin A, iodine, iron, and zinc. Essential macro- and micronutrients play a 
critical role in humoral immunity responses, cellular signaling and function, learning and cog-
nitive function, work capacity, reproductive health, and the evolution of microbial virulence.
Malnutrition: Th e lack of proper nutrients to meet daily needs and the largest single contribu-
tor to disease and poor health outcomes worldwide.
Noncommunicable diseases: Illnesses that are not transmissible directly from one per-
son to another. NCDs include heart diseases, cancers, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and 
Alzheimer’s disease, among others.
Nutrient-dense diet: Consumption of foods that are high in essential nutrients and lower in 
“empty calories” and follow the dietary recommendations.
Obesogenic culture: Th e sum of infl uences that the surroundings, opportunities, or conditions 
of life have on promoting obesity in individuals or populations.
Overnutrition and undernutrition: Malnutrition in all forms refers to both overnutrition (an 
overconsumption of food that leads to overweight, obesity, and diet-related chronic diseases) 
and undernutrition (not getting enough energy from nutrients).
Poverty: Th e state of not having enough resources to provide for a person’s basic needs of food, 
shelter, clothing, clean air, and clean water. A multifaceted concept that includes social, eco-
nomic, and political elements.
Right to food: Defi ned by the UN as the right to feed oneself with dignity.
Social determinants of health: Encompass the social, economic, and environmental factors 
that can aff ect the health and quality of life of a population.
REFERENCES
1. World Health Organization. Malnutrition. 2018. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
malnutrition
2. Coleman-Jensen A, Rabbitt M, Gregory C, Singh A. Household Food Security in the United States in 2016. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2017. https://www.ers.
usda.gov/webdocs/publications/84973/err-237.pdf?v=0
3. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Global Burden of Disease (GBD) Compare/Viz Hub. Seattle, 
WA: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2019. https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare
4. Food and Agriculture Organization. Th e State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2019. 
Safeguarding Against Economic Slowdowns and Downturns. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture 
Organization; 2019. http://www.fao.org/state-of-food-security-nutrition/en
5. Agha M, Agha R. Th e rising prevalence of obesity: part A: impact on public health. Int J Surg Oncol. 
2017;2(7):e17. doi:10.1097/IJ9.0000000000000017


===PAGE 403===
378 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
6. Falk LW, Sobal J, Bisogni CA, et al. Managing healthy eating: defi nitions, classifi cations, and strategies. 
Health Educ Behav. 2001;28(4):425–439.
7. Kapil U, Bhavna A. Adverse eff ects of poor micronutrient status during childhood and adolescence. 
Nutr Rev. 2002;60(suppl_5):S84–S90. doi:10.1301/00296640260130803
8. Ramakrishnan U. Prevalence of micronutrient malnutrition worldwide. Nutr Rev. 2002;60(5 Pt 2):S46–
S52. doi:10.1301/00296640260130731
9. Kejo D, Petrucka PM, Martin H, et al. Prevalence and predictors of anemia among children under 5 years 
of age in Arusha District, Tanzania. Pediatr Health Med Th er. 2018;9:9–15. doi:10.2147/PHMT.S148515
10. Vir S. Current status of iodine defi ciency disorders and strategy for its control in India. Indian J Pediatr. 
2002;69:589. doi:10.1007/BF02722687
11. Ploysangam A, Falciglia G, Brehm B. Eff ect of marginal zinc defi ciency on human growth and 
development. J Trop Pediatr. 1997;43(4):192–198. doi:10.1093/tropej/43.4.192
12. Katona P, Katona-Apte J. Th e interaction between nutrition and infection. Clin Infect Dis. 
2008;46(10):1582–1588. doi:10.1086/587658
13. World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report, 2019. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization; 2019.
14. NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. Worldwide trends in body-mass index, underweight, overweight, 
and obesity from 1975 to 2016: a pooled analysis of 2416 population-based measurement studies in 
128.9 million children, adolescents, and adults. Lancet. 2017;390(10113):2627–2642. doi:10.1016/S0140
-6736(17)32129-3
15. GBD 2016 Causes of Death Collaborators. Global, regional, and national age-sex specifi c mortality for 
264 causes of death, 1980-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. 
Lancet. 2017;390:1151–1210. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32152-9
16. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. 
Seattle, WA: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation; 2018.
17. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Current Eating Patterns in the United States. 2015. https://health.gov/
our-work/food-nutrition/2015-2020-dietary-guidelines/guidelines/chapter-2/current-eating-patterns-
in-the-unitedstates/
18. Hiza H, Casavale K, Guenther P, Davis C. Diet quality of Americans diff ers by age, sex, race/ethnicity, 
income, and education level. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;113(2):297–306. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2012.08.011
19. Troesch B, Biesalski HK, Bos R, et al. Increased intake of foods with high nutrient density can help 
to break the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition and obesity. Nutrients. 2015;7(7):6016–6037. 
doi:10.3390/nu7075266
20. Lake A, Townshend T. Obesogenic environments: exploring the built and food environments. J R Soc 
Promot Health. 2006;126(6):262–267. doi:10.1177/1466424006070487
21. Reicks MM, Randall JL, Haynes BJ. Factors aff ecting consumption of fruits and vegetables by low-
income families. J Am Diet Assoc. 1994;94(11):1309–1311. doi:10.1016/0002-8223(94)92467-8
22. Subramanian SV, Kawachi I, Smith GD. Income inequality and the double burden of under- and 
overnutrition in India. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2007;61:802–809. doi:10.1136/jech.2006.053801
23. WHO Expert Consultation. Appropriate body-mass index for Asian populations and its implications 
for policy and intervention strategies. Lancet. 2004;363(9403):157–163. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)
15268-3
24. World Health Organization. Waist Circumference and Waist-Hip Ratio. Report of a WHO Expert 
Consultation. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2011.
25. Jaacks L, Slining M, Popkin B. Recent trends in the prevalence of under- and overweight among 
adolescent girls in low- and middle-income countries. Pediatr Obes. 2015;10(6):428–435. doi:10.1111/
ijpo.12000
26. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Data & Statistics: Adult Obesity Facts. 2018. https://www
.cdc.gov/obesity/data/prevalence-maps.html
27. Finekelstein E, Trogdon J, Cohen J, Dietz W. Annual medical spending attributed to obesity: payer-and 
service-specifi c estimates. Health Aff . 2009;28(1):w822–w831. doi:10.1377/hlthaff .28.5.w822
28. International Diabetes Federation. Facts and Figures. 2019. https://idf.org/52-about-diabetes.html
29. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Heart Disease in the United States. 2017. https://www.cdc
.gov/heartdisease/facts.htm


===PAGE 404===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
379
30. Berthon BS, Wood LG. Nutrition and respiratory health—feature review. Nutrients. 2015;7(3):1618–
1643. doi:10.3390/nu7031618
31. Ferreira I, Brooks D, Lacasse T, Goldstein R. Nutritional support for individuals with COPD: a meta-
analysis. Chest. 2000;117(3):672–678. doi:10.1378/chest.117.3.672
32. McCullough ML, Patel AV, Kushi LH, et al. Following cancer prevention guidelines reduces risk of cancer, 
cardiovascular disease, and all‐cause mortality. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011;20(6):1089–
1097. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-1173
33. Petry N, Olofi n I, Boy E, et al. Th e eff ect of low dose iron and zinc intake on child micronutrient status 
and development during the fi rst 1000 days of life: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nutrients. 
2016;8(12):773. doi:10.3390/nu8120773
34. Glinoer D, Delange F. Th e potential repercussions of maternal, fetal, and neonatal hypothyroxinemia on 
the progeny. Th yroid. 2000;10(10):871–887. doi:10.1089/thy.2000.10.871
35. Bleichrodt N, Born MP. A metaanalysis of research on iodine and its relationship to cognitive 
development. In Stanbury JB, ed. Th e Damaged Brain of Iodine Defi ciency. New York, NY: Cognizant 
Communication Corporation; 1996:195–200.
36. Aggarwal A, Monsivais P, Drewnowski A. Nutrient intakes linked to better health outcomes are associated 
with higher diet costs in the US. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37533. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0037533
37. Sazawal S, Dhingra U, Dhingra P, et al. Eff ects of fortifi ed milk on morbidity in young children in north 
India: community based, randomised, double masked placebo controlled trial. BMJ. 2007;334:140.
38. Dean SV, Lassi ZS, Imam AM, Bhutta ZA. Preconception care: nutritional risks and interventions. 
Reprod Health. 2014;11(3):S3. doi:10.1186/1742-4755-11-S3-S3
39. Holick MF. High prevalence of vitamin D inadequacy and implications for health. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2006;81(3):353–373. doi:10.4065/81.3.353
40. World Health Organization. Global prevalence of vitamin A defi ciency in populations at risk 1995–2005. 
WHO Global Database on Vitamin A Defi ciency. Geneva, Author; 2009.
41. Drennen C, Coleman S, Ettinger de Cuba S, et al. Food insecurity, health, and development in children 
under age four years. Pediatrics. 2019;144:e20190824. doi:10.1542/peds.2019-0824
42. Rudd R, Seth P, David F, Scholl L. Increases in drug and opioid-involved overdose deaths—United States, 
2010–2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:1445–1452. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm655051e1
43. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Trends in opioid use, harms, and treatment. 
In: Phillips J, Ford M, Bonnie R, eds. Pain Management and the Opioid Epidemic: Balancing Societal 
and Individual Benefi ts and Risks of Prescription Opioid Use. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 2017. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK458661
44. Villapiano N, Winkelman T, Kozhimannil K, et al. Rural and urban diff erences in neonatal abstinence 
syndrome and maternal opioid use, 2004–2013. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(2):194–196. doi:10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2016.3750
45. Heil S, Jones H, Arria A, et al. Unintended pregnancy in opioid-abusing women. J Subst Abuse Treat. 
2011;40(2):199–202. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2010.08.011
46. Nabipour S, Ayu Said M, Hussain Habil M. Burden and nutritional defi ciencies in opiate addiction—
systematic review article. Iran J Public Health. 2014;43(8):1022–1032.
47. Imdad A, Bhutta ZA. Eff ect of preventive zinc supplementation on linear growth in children under 5 
years of age in developing countries: a meta-analysis of studies for input to the lives saved tool. BMC 
Public Health. 2011;11 Suppl 3:S22. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-11-S3-S22
48. Piernas C, Miles DR, Deming DM, et al. Estimating usual intakes mainly aff ects the micronutrient 
distribution among infants, toddlers and pre-schoolers from the 2012 Mexican National Health and 
Nutrition Survey. Public Health Nutr. 2016;19(6):1017–1026. doi:10.1017/S1368980015002311
49. Yu SH, Mason J, Crum J, et al. Diff erential eff ects of young maternal age on child growth. Glob Health 
Action. 2016;9:31171. doi:10.3402/gha.v9.31171
50. Van Lieshout RJ, Taylor VH, Boyle MH. Pre-pregnancy and pregnancy obesity and neurodevelopmental 
outcomes in off spring: a systematic review. Obes Rev. 2011;12(5):e548–e559. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
789X.2010.00850.x
51. Aviram A, Hod M, Yogev Y. Maternal obesity: implications for pregnancy outcome and long-term 
risks—a link to maternal nutrition. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. 2011;115 Suppl 1:S6–S10. doi:10.1016/S0020-
7292(11)60004-0


===PAGE 405===
380 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
52. American College Health Association. American College Health Association-National College Health 
Assessment II: Undergraduate Student Executive Summary Spring 2019. Silver Spring, MD: American 
College Health Association; 2019.
53. Stephens J, Althouse A, Tan A, Melnyk B. Th e role of race and gender in nutrition habits and self-effi  cacy: 
results from the Young Adult Weight Loss Study. J Obes. 2017;2017:1–6. doi:10.1155/2017/5980698
54. Yahia N, Wang D, Rapley M, Dey R. Assessment of weight status, dietary habits and beliefs, physical 
activity, and nutritional knowledge among university students. Perspect Public Health. 2016;136(4):231–
244. doi:10.1177/1757913915609945
55. U.S. Government Accountability Offi  ce. Food Insecurity: Better Information Could Help Eligible College 
Students Access Federal Food Assistance Benefi ts. Report to Congressional Requesters GAO-19-95. 
Washington, DC: Government Accountability Offi  ce; 2018. https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/696254
.pdf
56. Broton KM, Goldrick-Rab S. Going without: an exploration of food and housing insecurity among 
undergraduates. Educ Res. 2018;47(2):121–133. doi:10.3102/0013189X17741303
57. Dubick J, Mathews B, Cady C. Hunger on Campus. Th e Challenge of Food Insecurity for College 
Students. 2016. https://studentsagainsthunger.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Hunger_On_Campus.
pdf
58. Goldrick-Rab S, Richardson J, Hernandez A. Hungry and Homeless in College: Results from a National 
Study of Basic Needs Insecurity in Higher Education. 2017. https://www.higheredtoday.org/2017/03/17/
hungry-homeless-college-results-national-study-basic-needs-insecurity-higher-education
59. Martinez S, Glik D, Malan H, Watson T. College students identify university support for basic needs and 
life skills as key ingredient in addressing food insecurity on campus. Calif Agric. 2017;71(3):130–138. 
doi:10.3733/ca.2017a0023
60. Morris L, Smith S, Davis J, Null D. Th e prevalence of food security and insecurity among Illinois 
University Students. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2016;48(6):376–382.e371. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2016.03.013
61. Silva M, Kleinert W, Sheppard A, et al. Th e relationship between food security, housing stability, and 
school performance among college students in an urban university. J Coll Stud Ret. 2017;19(3):284–299. 
doi:10.1177/1521025115621918
62. Hanbazaza M, Ball G, Farmer A, et al. A comparison of characteristics and food insecurity coping 
strategies between international and domestic postsecondary students using a food bank located on a 
university campus. Can J Diet Pract Res. 2017;78(4):208–211. doi:10.3148/cjdpr-2017-012
63. Knol L, Robb C, McKinley E, Wood M. Very low food security status is related to lower cooking self-
effi  cacy and less frequent food preparation behaviors among college students. J Nutr Educ Behav. 
2018;51(3):357–363. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2018.10.009
64. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aff airs, Population Division. World Population 
Ageing 2013. ST/ESA/SER.A/348; 2013.
65. World Health Organization. Global Health Observatory Data: Life Expectancy. 2016. https://www.who
.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/life_tables/situation_trends_text/en
66. Houston DK, Nicklas BJ, Ding J, et al. Dietary protein intake is associated with lean mass change in 
older, community-dwelling adults: the Health, Aging, and Body Composition (Health ABC) Study. Am 
J Clin Nutr. 2008;87(1):150–155. doi:10.1093/ajcn/87.1.150
67. Weimer JR. Many elderly at nutritional risk. USDA Food Rev. 1997;20(1):42–48.
68. Watson L, Leslie W, Hankey C. Under-nutrition in old age: diagnosis and management. Rev Clin 
Gerontol. 2006;15:1–12.
69. Kenney WL, Chiu P. Infl uence of age on thirst and fl uid intake. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:1524–
1532. doi:10.1097/00005768-200109000-00016
70. Mentes J. Oral hydration in older adults: greater awareness is needed in preventing, recognizing, and 
treating dehydration. Am J Nurs. 2006;106:40–49. doi:10.1097/00000446-200606000-00023
71. Xiao H, Barber J, Campbell E. Economic burden of dehydration among hospitalized elderly patients. 
Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2004;61:2534–2540. doi:10.1093/ajhp/61.23.2534
72. Kyle UG, Genton L, Hans D, et al. Age-related diff erences in fat-free mass, skeletal muscle, body cell mass 
and fat mass between 18 and 94 years. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2001;55:663–672. doi:10.1038/sj.ejcn.1601198
73. Pooler J, Srinivasan M. Issue Brief: Social Determinants of Health and the Aging Population. AARP 
Foundation and IMPAQ International; 2018. https://www.impaqint.com/sites/default/fi les/issue-briefs/
Issue%20Brief_SDOHandAgingPopulation_0.pdf


===PAGE 406===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
381
74. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. National Healthcare Disparities Report 2013. Rockville, 
MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2014.
75. Anderson G. Chronic Care: Making the Case for Ongoing Care. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson 
Foundation; 2010.
76. Rabin B, Brownson R, Haire-Joshu D, et al. A glossary for dissemination and implementation research 
in health. J Public Health Manag Pract. 2008;14(2):117–123. doi:10.1097/01.PHH.0000311888.06252.bb
77. Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics. Older Americans 2016: Key Indicators of 
Well-Being. 2016. https://agingstats.gov/docs/LatestReport/Older-Americans-2016-Key-Indicators-of
-WellBeing.pdf
78. Kirkman MS, Briscoe VJ, Clark N, et al. Diabetes in older adults. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(12):2650–2664. 
doi:10.2337/dc12-1801
79. National Institute on Aging. Stroke. 2017. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/stroke
80. Mannimo D, Buist A. Global burden of COPD: risk factors, prevalence, and future trends. Lancet. 
2007;370:9589. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61380-4
81. Alzheimer’s Disease International. World Alzheimer Report 2015: Th e Global Impact of Dementia. 
London: Alzheimer's Disease International; 2015.
82. Endoy MP. Anorexia among older adults. Am J Nurse Pract. 2005;9(5):31–38.
83. Evans C. Malnutrition in the elderly: a multifactorial failure to thrive. Perm J. 2005;9(3):38–41. 
doi:10.7812/TPP/05-056
84. Huff man G. Evaluating and treating unintentional weight loss in the elderly. Am Fam Phys. 
2002;65(4):640–650.
85. Srivarathan A, Jensen AN, Kristiansen M. Community-based interventions to enhance healthy aging 
in disadvantaged areas: perceptions of older adults and health care professionals. BMC Health Serv Res. 
2019;19(1):7. doi:10.1186/s12913-018-3855-6
86. Food and Agriculture Organization. Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the 
Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations; 2005. http://www.fao.org/3/a-y7937e.pdf
87. Napoli M, De Muro P, Mazziotta M, et al. Towards a Food Insecurity Multidimensional Index (FIMI). 
Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; 2011.
88. World Food Programme. Emergency Food Security Assessment Handbook. 2nd ed. Rome, Italy: World 
Food Programme; 2009:170. https://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/manual_
guide_proced/wfp203244.pdf
89. Albu M, Murphy E. Market Analysis Tool in Rapid-Onset Emergencies. Practical Action Consulting, 
Warwickshire, CV23; 2007. http://www.cashlearning.org/downloads/marketanalysisinemergencies
-phaseonereportfi nal.pdf
90. Galvez M, Morland K, Raines C, et al. Race and food store availability in an inner city neighborhood. 
Public Health Nutr. 2007;11:624–631. doi:10.1017/S1368980007001097
91. Food and Agriculture Organization. World Food Summit: Rome Declaration on World Food Security and 
World Food Summit Plan of Action. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization; 1996.
92. Food Research & Action Center. Th e Impact of Poverty, Food Insecurity, and Poor Nutrition on Health and 
Well-Being. 2017. https://frac.org/wp-content/uploads/hunger-health-impact-poverty-food-insecurity
-health-well-being.pdf
93. Holben DH, Taylor CA. Food insecurity and its association with central obesity and other markers of 
metabolic syndrome among persons aged 12 to 18 years in the United States. J Am Osteopath Assoc. 
2015;115(9):536–543. doi:10.7556/jaoa.2015.111
94. Weinfi eld NS, Mills G, Borger C, et al. Hunger in America 2014. Chicago, IL: Feeding America; 2014.
95. Ver Ploeg M, Mancino L, Todd JE, et al. Where Do Americans Usually Shop for Food and How Do Th ey 
Travel To Get Th ere? Initial Findings from the National Household Food Acquisition and Purchase Survey. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2015.
96. Wiig K, Smith C. Th e art of grocery shopping on a food stamp budget: factors infl uencing the food 
choices of low-income women as they try to make ends meet. Public Health Nutr. 2009;12(10):1726–
1734. doi:10.1017/S1368980008004102
97. Darmon N, Drewnowski A. Contribution of food prices and diet cost to socioeconomic disparities in 
diet quality and health: a systematic review and analysis. Nutr Rev. 2015;73(10):643–660. doi:10.1093/
nutrit/nuv027


===PAGE 407===
382 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
98. Kant AK, Graubard BI. Energy density of diets reported by American adults: association with food 
group intake, nutrient intake, and body weight. Int J Obes. 2005;29:950–956. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0802980
99. Fleischhacker SE, Evenson KR, Rodriguez DA, Ammerman AS. A systematic review of fast food access 
studies. Obes Rev. 2011;12(5):e460–e471. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2010.00715.x
100. Pereira MA, Kartashov AI, Ebbeling CB, et al. Fast-food habits, weight gain, and insulin resistance 
(the CARDIA study): 15-year prospective analysis. Lancet. 2005;365(9453), 36–42. doi:10.1016/S0140
-6736(04)17663-0
101. Powell LM, Nguyen BT. Fast-food and full-service restaurant consumption among children and 
adolescents: eff ect on energy, beverage, and nutrient intake. JAMA Pediatr. 2013;167(1):14–20. 
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.417
102. Leung CW, Epel ES, Willett WC, et al. Household food insecurity is positively associated with 
depression among low-income Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program participants and income-
eligible nonparticipants. J Nutr. 2015;145(3):622–627. doi:10.3945/jn.114.199414
103. Mowen AJ. Parks, Playgrounds, and Active Living. San Diego, CA: Active Living Research, San Diego 
State University; 2010.
104. Neckerman KM, Lovasi GS, Davies S, et al. Disparities in urban neighborhood conditions: evidence 
from GIS measures and fi eld observation in New York City. J Public Health Policy. 2009;30(suppl 
1):S264–S285. doi:10.1057/jphp.2008.47
105. Powell LM, Wada R, Kumanyika SK. Racial/ethnic and income disparities in child and adolescent 
exposure to food and beverage television ads across the U.S. media markets. Health Place. 2014;29:124–
131. doi:10.1016/j.healthplace.2014.06.006
106. Yancey AK, Cole BL, Brown R, et al. A cross-sectional prevalence study of ethnically targeted and 
general audience outdoor obesity-related advertising. Milbank Q. 2009;87(1):155–184. doi:10.1111/
j.1468-0009.2009.00551.x
107. U.S. Department of Agriculture. U.S. Household Food Security Survey Module. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2012. https://www.ers.usda.gov/media/8271/
hh2012.pdf
108. RTI International Center for Health and Environmental Modeling. Current and Prospective Scope of 
Hunger and Food Security in America: A Review of Current Research. Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI 
International; 2014. https://www.rti.org/sites/default/fi les/resources/full_hunger_report_fi nal_07-24-
14.pdf
109. Census of Agriculture. Farm Demographics. 2014. https://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2012/
Online_Resources/Highlights/Farm_Demographics.
110. HLPE. Nutrition and food systems. A report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and 
Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security, Rome; 2017.
111. Farm Subsidy Database. Environmental Working Group. 2014. http://farm.ewg.org
112. Foley J. It’s time to rethink America’s corn system. Scientifi c American. March 5, 2013. https://www.
scientifi camerican.com/article/time-to-rethink-corn
113. Food and Agriculture Organization. Th e Future of Food and Agriculture: Alternative Pathways to 
2050. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization; 2018:224. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO. 
 http://www.fao.org/3/I8429EN/i8429en.pdf
114. Hall KD, Guo J, Dore M, Chow CC. Th e progressive increase of food waste in America and its 
environmental impact. PLoS One. 2009;4(11):9–14. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007940
115. Jilcott Pitts SB, Gustafson A, Wu Q, et al. Farmers’ market use is associated with fruit and vegetable 
consumption in diverse southern rural communities. Nutr J. 2014;13:1. doi:10.1186/1475-2891-13-1
116. Rossi JJ, Woods TA, Allen JE. Impacts of a Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) voucher program 
on food lifestyle behaviors: evidence from an employer-sponsored pilot program. Sustainability, MDPI, 
Open Access Journal. 2017;9(9):1–21.
117. Coleman-Jensen A, Rabbitt M, Gregory C, Singh A. Household Food Security in the United States in 
2018, ERR-270. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service; 2019.
118. Owens N, Donley A. Th e impact of the Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program on participating Florida 
farmers: a research note. J Rural Soc Sci. 2015;30(1):Article 6. https://egrove.olemiss.edu/jrss/vol30/
iss1/6


===PAGE 408===
 
14. Current Nutrition-Related Health Issues and Challenges 
383
119. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Estimates of Foodborne Illness in the United States. 2011. 
https://www.cdc.gov/foodborneburden
120. Friel S, Ford L. Systems, food security, and human health. Food Secur. 2015;7:437. doi:10.1007/s12571-
015-0433-1
121. United Nations. Sustainable Development Goal 2: Targets and Indicators. Sustainable Development 
Goals. 2019. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg2
122. Bhutta ZA, Salam RA. Global nutrition epidemiology and trends. Ann Nutr Metab. 2012;61(suppl 
1):19–27. doi:10.1159/000345167
123. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Study Shows Strong Nutrition Education Can Lead to Healthier 
Food Choices by Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Recipients. https://www.fns.usda.gov/
pressrelease/2013/fns-001313. Published December 5, 2013.
124. National Council on Aging. About NCOA. https://www.ncoa.org/about-ncoa
125. Offi  ce of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. CESCR General Comment No. 12: Th e Right 
to Adquate Food (Art. 11). https://www.refworld.org/pdfi d/4538838c11.pdf. Published May 12, 1999.
126. World Health Organization. Household air pollution and health. 2020. https://www.who.int/news
-room/fact-sheets/detail/household-air-pollution-and-health
127. World Health Organization. Measles. 2020. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
measles
128. World Health Organization. Malaria. 2020. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/
malaria
129. World Health Organization. UNICEF-WHO-Th e World Bank Group, Joint child malnutrition estimates- 
Levels and trends. 2019. https://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/estimates2018/en/
130. Bellows A, Hamm M. U.S.-based community food security: infl uences, practice, debate. J Study Food 
Soc. 2002;6(1):31–44. doi:10.2752/152897902786732725


===PAGE 410===
15
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
NEEDS AND STRATEGIES 
IN PUBLIC HEALTH NUTRITION
KYLE L. THOMPSON AND OLIVIA ANDERSON
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Articulate the necessity and importance of continuous professional development through-
out the career course of each public health nutrition (PHN) professional.
2. Describe strategies and methods for professional self-assessment and development.
3. List and identify professional organizations to support professional growth and networks 
in PHN.
4. Describe the importance of the grantsmanship process for PHN professionals.
5. Describe the steps in the grantsmanship process.
6. Develop a plan for lifelong learning and growth as a professional.
INTRODUCTION
Who is a professional? What is professionalism?
As PHN continues to assume increasing prominence within the broader fi eld of public health, 
the importance of defi ning professional attributes for PHN practitioners grows. Th e word profes-
sional is derived from the Middle English word profession, which described the act of professing 
one’s vows to a religious community; the Middle English word sprang from the Latin word prof-
iteri, “to declare publicly.”1 Th us, a professional is someone who publicly declares—or vows—skill 
in a certain area of service or knowledge. Today, professionals can be defi ned as persons who 
move into a paid occupation that includes extensive training toward the development of formal 
qualifi cations and expertise.
Professionalism has been referred to in terms of specifi c competencies, expertise, and skills 
expected for the profession. While professionalism can also be defi ned subjectively, with diff erent 
individuals holding diff erent views on which characteristics constitute professional behavior, sev-
eral traits are commonly associated with professionalism. Professional traits in healthcare careers 
include but are not limited to competence in the discipline practiced, reliability, calmness under 
pressure, fl exibility, problem-solving capabilities, an empathetic and compassionate demeanor, 


===PAGE 411===
386 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
excellent communication skills, a neat appearance, confi dence without arrogance, a strong work 
ethic, good self-management and organizational abilities, accountability for one’s own actions, 
understanding and accepting one’s own limits, and acceptance of responsibility for continu-
ing education and improvement of skills.2,3 Professionalism may also be indicated by certifi ca-
tion and/or credentialing by professional boards, such as the National Board of Public Health 
Examiners or, for dietetics professionals, the Commission on Dietetic Registration.4,5
Even though the term profession does not have one standard defi nition, several features are 
commonly associated with the word.6 A profession encompasses a specifi c body of knowledge 
and fi eld of practice, establishes a required course of training and credentialing for practitioners, 
develops ethical standards for practice and holds members of the profession accountable to those 
standards, and practices for the public good.6 For the benefi t and protection of the public, profes-
sions—and professionals—are expected to regulate themselves.
Because the fi eld of PHN is still emerging, the formulation of professional standards for prac-
titioners is in its initial stages.7 Th is situation presents challenges for those who wish to confi rm 
their PHN skills with appropriate credentialing, and for those seeking to educate future prac-
titioners. However, along with challenges come great opportunities to defi ne the profession, to 
delineate its scope of practice, and to develop educational and training opportunities that result in 
the confi rmation of specifi c professional skills and competencies, all focused on the public good. 
Organizations such as the Association of State Public Health Nutritionists (ASPHN), the World 
Public Health Nutrition Association (WPHNA), and the Association of Graduate Programs in 
Public Health Nutrition (AGPPHN) have identifi ed the training and equipping of future PHN 
leaders and practitioners as a priority action initiative.
Th is chapter discusses the importance of professional development throughout the span of one’s 
career. In addition, this chapter discusses the development of guidelines for professional perfor-
mance in PHN, suggests strategies for continuing professional development, provides a summary 
of professional organizations to support ongoing professional growth, leadership development, and 
emphasizes the development of grantsmanship skills as a key area of professional development.
THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTINUOUS PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
In a seminal article published in 1999 in the Journal of the American Dietetic Association (now the 
Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics), Roberta L. Duyff , MS, RD, stated, “With our 
fi rst breath we start a journey of learning. It is an adventure – for life and for our development 
as nutrition professionals.”8 Once one completes a program of study and enters the professional 
world, the process of learning has, in many ways, only begun.
Th e fi eld of PHN, which incorporates subsets of both public health and nutrition knowledge, 
shares the broad spectrum of practice and the burgeoning body of knowledge common to both 
disciplines. Because the fi eld of PHN is rapidly developing and changing, practitioners must be 
accountable for maintaining and improving knowledge, skills, and professional attributes. Th e 
importance of professional development may be highlighted by a question: Would you, as a 
patient, want to be treated by a physician who graduated from medical school and completed his 
or her residency 20 years ago, but has made no eff ort to update his or her skills or engage in con-
tinuing professional education (CPE) since that date? Such a practitioner would have failed to 
align his or her practice with one of the key characteristics of both a professional and a profession: 
self-accountability and self-regulation.


===PAGE 412===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
387
Public health nutritionists, who work with groups and populations to promote health, disease 
prevention, and quality of life through nutrition, have a responsibility to stay current with knowl-
edge and skills in order to eff ectively deliver evidence-based, high-quality nutrition interventions 
to their populations served. Professional development as public health nutritionists is a career- 
and lifelong endeavor. PHN training programs should teach the process and skills of continuing 
professional development as part of the standard curriculum.
STRATEGIES AND METHODS OF PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Levels of Professional Development
Th e Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition (DMSA) is frequently used to conceptualize levels of 
skill development in health professions education.9–12 Th e DMSA has defi ned the following levels 
of competence for adult learners: novice, advanced beginner, competent, profi cient, and expert.9 
Th e DMSA describes a progression in which a novice begins by carefully following rules while 
under supervision. Over time, the novice develops profi ciency and expertise that facilitate inde-
pendent, creative, ethical practice at multiple levels of infl uence, along with the ability to super-
vise and mentor others.9,10,13–15
New practitioners should adopt a realistic view of the process of professional development. 
While a newly graduated PHN practitioner may have a great deal of knowledge gained from 
study and the completion of experience-based projects, seasoned professionals point out that 
true profi ciency in practice comes only with time.10,13 Time is required to interact with a wide 
variety of people and situations; to internalize the learning that occurs at the intersections of 
knowledge, experience, and practice; and to develop the confi dence that enables one to progress 
toward higher levels of practice. Realistic attitudes include the understanding that career pro-
gression is seldom smooth. Signifi cant professional growth may occur in the process of accepting 
and dealing with obstacles, challenges, and failures that inevitably transpire during the course of 
one’s career. Personal and professional preferences may indicate a desire to remain at a competent 
or profi cient level throughout one’s career, rather than seeking to practice as an expert. And pro-
fessionals may operate at a high level in one area of competence, while performing as a beginner 
in another, more recently pursued area. Accurate perceptions of the stages of professional devel-
opment will assist PHN professionals in understanding what to expect of themselves at various 
locations on the professional development continuum.
Several nutrition- and health-related professions have named and defi ned levels of profes-
sional development, working within the context of the DMSA. Th e Academy of Nutrition and 
Dietetics (AND) provides minimum standards of practice for core functions of the nutrition and 
dietetics technician and the registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN).16 Practitioners of focus areas 
of dietetics—examples include clinical nutrition management, oncology nutrition, education of 
nutrition and dietetics practitioners, and others—are described as “competent,” “profi cient,” or 
“expert.”17 In a seminal book published in 1984, Patricia Benner defi ned fi ve levels of practice 
in the nursing profession: novice, advanced beginner, competent, profi cient, and expert, align-
ing with the DMSA.9,13,18 It is important to remember that practitioners of various health disci-
plines may simultaneously function as experts in some focus areas and as competent in others.11 
Important, too, is the recognition that not every profi cient professional desires to reach the expert 
level of practice, which typically involves managerial/executive responsibilities.10 While the exact 
terminology may vary among disciplines, health professions in general recognize that there are 


===PAGE 413===
388 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
levels of practice and that there is a progression of development that occurs as novice practi-
tioners gain experience over time. Table 15.1 provides a chart aligning the DMSA with levels of 
PHN practice.
Standards for Professional Development
Specifi c content areas for professional development for PHN practitioners are in formation. 
Competencies have been described by the Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and 
Dietetics (ACEND) as the “the described knowledge, skills, and judgment needed to perform as 
a professional.”19 Like other health professions, the ACEND has developed competencies, which 
are currently used to guide the education of dietetics professionals, including dietetic technicians, 
registered (DTRs), and RDNs.19 Th e ACEND competencies, like competencies designed for other 
health professions, are used for purposes beyond novice practitioner training: (a) as a framework 
for CPE; (b) assessment of practitioner competency; (c) benchmarking for practitioner creden-
tialing; (d) career planning; and (e) formulation of job descriptions.7,19
In 2011, the WPHNA published a background paper on the process of establishing compe-
tency areas for global PHN workers.7 Th e WPHNA authors provide a rationale for the develop-
ment of specifi c competencies for PHN practitioners. Th ey explain that professional skills for 
public health nutritionists diff er from those required for clinical nutrition practice and state that 
their model:
recognises that population-based and promotional-preventative actions are required to 
address malnutrition in both forms [under- and overnutrition]. Th is requires diff erent work 
that compliments clinical practice and consequently requires additional competencies, the 
knowledge, skills, and attitudes to perform this work.7
Th e background paper identifi es 10 core competency areas for global PHN professionals. Th e 
10 competencies, or functions, are encompassed within three broad areas of practice and may be 
summarized as follows:
1. 
Research and analysis: Primary competencies include monitoring, assessing, and com-
municating population nutrition data and nutrition needs.
2. 
Build capacity: Primary competencies include developing community, organizational, 
and workforce capacity.
3. 
Intervention management: Primary competencies include planning, implementing, 
managing, and evaluating interventions; enhancing community knowledge of healthful 
nutrition; advocating for healthful nutrition policy, nutrition equity, and the meeting 
of nutrition needs for all throughout the life span.
Table 15.2 provides a chart of the 10 core competencies described by the WPHNA. In the 
competency document provided in Table 15.2, the WPHNA has identifi ed three categories of 
workforce personnel that can be roughly aligned with levels of practice for global public health 
nutritionists.7 Competencies are determined to be core or complementary for each of the three 
practitioner types described: frontline, manager, and specialist.7
Th e AGPPHN in 2013 published competencies for training PHN professionals. PHN prac-
titioners from a variety of educational and government agencies in the United States assisted 
in the preparation of this document. Th e competency document is available on the AGPPHN 
website.


===PAGE 414===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
389
TABLE 15.1 ALIGNMENT OF THE DMSA WITH LEVELS OF PHN PRACTICE
DMSA LEVEL
PRACTITIONER EXAMPLE
TYPICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Novice
PHN student in fi nal phases of initial educational program
Example: Student completing a fi eld experience or cap-
stone project
• Lacks experience that would otherwise provide context to inform 
applications of rules and guidelines to experiences
• Carefully follows rules, policies, and guidelines
• Requires ongoing supervision and mentoring
• Collaborative and team skills are emerging
• Professionalism is emerging 
Advanced beginner
Newly graduated PHN employee in fi rst employment 
setting
Example: New WIC nutritionist working in a county health 
department
• Begins to gain a variety of experiences, which provide context for 
applications of rules and guidelines to situations
• Carefully follows rules, policies, and guidelines
• Requires supervision and mentoring; begins to work independently 
and assume responsibility for specifi c tasks
• Competence is emerging
• Demonstrates collaborative and team skills
• Displays professionalism by practicing in an ethical and responsible 
manner
• Engages in ongoing professional development; process is guided by 
mentors
Competent
PHN practitioner (2 or more years’ work experience)
Example: Food and nutrition educator for a multicounty 
group of food pantries served by a regional food bank
• Synthesizes lessons learned from experiences and situations; has 
developed a context to inform applications of rules, policies, and 
guidelines; innate sense of “what to do” has emerged and continues 
to develop
• Works independently; takes responsibility for specifi c tasks and own 
performance
• Competence is consistent and well established
• Demonstrates good collaborative and team skills
• Displays professionalism by practicing in an ethical and responsible 
manner
• Engages in ongoing professional development; process is guided by 
self and mentors
(continued)


===PAGE 415===
390 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
TABLE 15.1 ALIGNMENT OF THE DMSA WITH LEVELS OF PHN PRACTICE (continued)
DMSA LEVEL
PRACTITIONER EXAMPLE
TYPICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Profi cient
Experienced PHN practitioner with a track record of 
excellence (8 or more years’ work experience)
Example: SNS for a county school district
• Has developed an innate sense of “what to do”; rules, policies, and 
guidelines have become internalized and provide the context for 
practice
• Works independently; takes responsibility for own performance; may 
supervise/manage the work of others
• Track record of excellence in performance is well established
• Demonstrates excellent collaborative and team skills; may engage in 
collaboration and team-building
• Consistently displays professionalism by practicing in an ethical and 
responsible manner
• Engages in ongoing professional development; process is guided by 
self and informed by mentors
Expert
Seasoned PHN practitioner with broad experience, a 
track record of excellence and accomplishment, and 
evident leadership abilities
Example: Regional director of the USDA FNS 
• Highly developed, innate sense of “what to do”; rules, policies, and 
guidelines have become internalized and provide the context for 
practice
• Establishes organizational vision, goals, and initiatives; applies and 
manages resources; directs and manages staff in accomplishing goals
• Mentors emerging leaders
• Track record of excellence and accomplishments is well established
• Leads collaboration and team-building efforts
• Consistently displays professionalism by practicing in an ethical and 
responsible manner
• Engages in ongoing professional development; process is guided by 
self and informed by mentors
DMSA, Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition; FNS, food and nutrition service; PHN, public health nutrition, SNS, school nutrition specialist; USDA, U.S. Department of Agriculture; WIC, Special 
Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
Source: Data from Brody RA, Byham-Gray L, Touger-Decker R, et al. Identifying components of advanced-level clinical nutrition practice: a Delphi study. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;112(6):859–869; 
Dreyfus SE, Dreyfus HL. Mind Over Machine. New York, NY: Free Press; 1998; Martin K. The Improvement Professional’s Evolving Role: From Practitioner to Facilitator to Coach. 2011. https://
www.slideshare.net/KarenMartinGroup/the-improvement-professionals-evolving-role-from-practitioner-to-facilitator-oto-coac/13-Dreyfus_Model_ofSkill_AcquisitionStuart_Hubert


===PAGE 416===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
391
TABLE 15.2 WPHNA’S 10 CORE FUNCTIONS FOR GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH 
NUTRITIONISTS, WITH FUNCTIONS OF KEY WORKFORCE ACTORS AT THE FRONTLINE, 
MANAGER, AND SPECIALIST LEVELS
CATEGORY
CORE PHN FUNCTION
FRONT LINE
MANAGER
SPECIALIST
Research and 
analysis
1.  Monitor, assess, and commu-
nicate population nutritional 
health needs and issues
2.  Develop and communicate 
intelligence about determi-
nants of nutrition problems, 
policy impacts, intervention 
effectiveness, and prioriti-
zation through research and 
evaluation
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Core
Build 
capacity
3.  Develop the various tiers of 
the PHN workforce and its col-
laborators through education, 
disseminating intelligence, 
and ensuring organizational 
support
4.  Build community capacity and 
social capital to engage in, 
identify, and build solutions to 
nutrition problems and issues
5.  Build organizational capacity 
and systems to facilitate and 
coordinate effective PHN 
action
Complementary
Core
Core
Core
Complementary
Core
Core
Core
Core
Intervention 
management
 6.  Plan, develop, implement, 
and evaluate interventions 
that address the determi-
nants of priority PHN issues 
and problems and promote 
equity
 7.  Enhance and sustain popula-
tion (community) knowledge 
and awareness of healthful 
eating so that dietary choices 
are informed choices
 8.  Advocate for food- and 
nutrition-related policy and 
government support to pro-
tect and promote health
 9.  Promote, develop, and 
support healthy growth and 
development throughout all 
life stages
10.  Promote equitable access 
to safe and healthy food so 
that healthy choices are easy 
choices
Core
Complementary
Core
Complementary
Complementary
Core
Core
Complementary
Core
Core
Complementary
Core
Core function, those functions that are regarded as absolutely necessary, without which would imply gaps in public 
health capacity; complementary functions, may be core in some contexts, often complementary to the work of the PHN 
specialist; PHN, public health nutrition; WPHNA, World Public Health Nutrition Association.
Source: From Hughes R, Shrimpton R, Recine E, Margetts B. A Competency Framework for Global Public Health Nutrition 
Workforce Development: A Background Paper. London, UK: World Public Health Nutrition Association; 2011. http://www
.wphna.org/htdocs/downloadsapr2012/12-03%20WPHNA%20Draft%20competency%20standards%20report.pdf


===PAGE 417===
392 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Strategies for Professional Development
In her article on lifelong learning, Roberta Duyff  outlined a process that has been adapted and 
utilized as a framework for professional development by the AND, as well as other professional 
organizations.8 Since Duyff ’s article was published in 1999, various iterations of the professional 
development process have been implemented by health professions. However, the basic principles 
of repeated cycling through a process of self-assessment, goal setting, strategic planning, plan 
implementation, and further self-assessment and evaluation remain key components of profes-
sional development.8 Th e goal of professional development is continuous growth in professional 
competency throughout the career span. Table 15.3 lists steps in the professional development 
process.
Step One: Self-Assessment
Self-assessment is a core component of professional development, and a vital element of lifelong 
learning.20–22 Self-assessment has been defi ned as the ability to compare and judge one’s own per-
formance against a standard of practice.23 Ideally, professionals should be able to review their 
practice, identify areas for improvement, and plan activities to fi ll the knowledge and skill gaps 
identifi ed.
Self-assessment consists of three important and complementary tasks. First, the professional 
chooses a standard of performance and performs a comparison of actual performance with that 
standard. PHN professionals may choose to use the WPHNA competencies as a comparative stan-
dard. Second, the professional seeks constructive feedback and further education, experiences, or 
remediation as needed.23 Th ird, the professional defi nes current and desired future professional 
roles, and thinks ahead to establish a timeline for growth.24 Several professional organizations 
TABLE 15.3 STEPS IN THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
STEP
DESCRIPTION
THE CYCLE 
REPEATS
1. Self-assessment
Comparison of one’s own performance to a 
selected standard
2. Goal setting
Based on the results of self-assessment, develop-
ment of specifi c goals for professional develop-
ment and performance improvement
3.  Strategic planning
The process of planning experiences and activities 
designed to achieve desired goals
4. Implementation
The process of implementing planned experiences 
and activities
5.  Repeat the 
 professional devel-
opment process
The process of periodically and regularly review-
ing the results of professional development and 
repeating the cycle, beginning with self-assessment
Source: Data from Duyff RL. The value of lifelong learning: key element in professional career development. J Acad Nutr 
Diet. 1999;99(5):538–543; Commission on Dietetic Registration. Professional Development Portfolio Guide with Essential 
Practice Competencies. 2019. https://www.cdrnet.org/vault/2459/web/fi les/PDP%20Guide%E2%80%942020.pdf; Doran 
GT. There’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals and objectives. Manag Rev. 1981;70:35–36.


===PAGE 418===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
393
encourage practitioners to ask themselves questions like, “Where do I want to be in 3 years? In 5 
years?”21
Professionals engage in self-assessment continually, as daily tasks and events, and perhaps 
weekly and monthly performance indicators, indicate opportunities for improvement. Planning 
for comprehensive self-assessment at regular intervals—perhaps annually or semiannually—is 
important to ensure that this important process is not overlooked. Governing bodies of health 
professions nearly always mandate participation in a regular process of professional development, 
including self-assessment, as a requirement for maintaining credentialing.
Researchers have found that accurate self-assessment is notoriously diffi  cult.25,26 Human nature 
impacts self-evaluation. A natural tendency is to overlook areas to improve because identifi cation 
of defi ciencies is uncomfortable and the eff ort required to correct them may be substantial and 
inconvenient.26 Any number of contextual factors may aff ect one’s ability to self-assess, including 
one’s general life situation, practice environment, and a myriad of other infl uences.23 Individuals 
are prone to rate themselves too high or too low compared to the chosen standard.25 Professionals 
may lack a systematic method for self-evaluation, not understand which performance criteria 
should be self-assessed, or simply not understand the importance of self-assessment. For this 
reason, it is important to remember that self-assessment also includes seeking external feedback. 
Th us, an accurate self-assessment would include consideration of such evidence as performance 
reviews, comments, and input from colleagues and clients, customer satisfaction surveys, and 
other objective evidence.
Systematic self-assessment provides meaningful comparisons that are helpful in planning pro-
fessional development activities. Based on the results of a comprehensive self-assessment that 
includes personal refl ection and objective evidence, the professional is ready to construct and 
implement a strategic plan for development.
Step Two: Goal Setting
Based on the results of self-assessment, the PHN professional should set professional develop-
ment goals. Th e concept of SMART goals has been popular since 1981, when George T. Doran 
wrote an article proposing the concept.27 Th e acronym defi nes a process for creating goals that are 
specifi c, measurable, achievable, realistic, and timely.27 Timely goals may include both short-term 
(1 year or less) and long-term (usually considered 3–5 years) goals. Goals should be prioritized 
in order of importance.
For example, a PHN practitioner may decide that improvement of grantsmanship skills is a 
professional priority. Examples of SMART goals directed at this priority include:
 
■
“I will request a mentor in grantsmanship from my supervisor, and will make the 
request within 2 weeks of implementing this strategic plan” (S—request a mentor in 
grantsmanship; M—the task is either done or not; A—the goal is achievable within the 
current employment situation; R—the goal is realistic and feasible to accomplish; T—
the goal is timely).
 
■
“I will register for and attend a webinar on grant writing within 3 months of imple-
menting this strategic plan” (S—register for and attend a webinar on grantsman-
ship; M—the task is either done or not; A—the goal is achievable within the current 
employment situation; R—the goal is realistic and feasible to accomplish; T—the goal 
is timely).


===PAGE 419===
394 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
 
■
“I will complete and submit a community foundation grant application for a new 
commercial refrigerator for our local food pantry within 6 months of implementing this 
strategic plan” (S—complete and submit a community foundation grant application; M—
the task is either done or not; A—the goal is achievable within the current employment 
situation; R—the goal is realistic and feasible to accomplish; T—the goal is timely).
SMART goals are more likely to be achieved than poorly defi ned, general statements such as, 
“I want to be a better public health nutrition professional.”
When setting goals, professionals should consider profession-specifi c requirements for the 
maintenance of credentialing. Such requirements may involve earning a specifi c number of CPE 
hours or credits, or participating in certain activities, over a specifi ed period of time.21 Th e stra-
tegic plan should include activities directed toward meeting the profession’s credentialing stan-
dards. Table 15.4 provides a description of SMART goals. Table 15.4 provides a description of 
SMART goals, based on a PHN practitioner’s work assignment to plan community-focused gro-
cery store tours.40
TABLE 15.4 SMART GOALS: EXPLANATION AND EXAMPLES
SMART GOAL 
CRITERION
EXPLANATION
“DO THIS” EXAMPLE
“DON’T DO 
THIS” EXAMPLE
1. Specifi c
The goal is clearly 
defi ned and 
described
“I will plan and deliver a 45-minute 
grocery store tour focused on pack-
ing a healthful lunch box for school 
or work.”
“I will get better at 
doing grocery store 
tours.”
2. Measurable
It is clear whether 
or not the goal has 
been reached.
“The delivery date for the tour is 
May 6, 20__. I’ve communicated 
and collaborated with the store 
manager on all details of the tour. 
The lesson plan for the tour will be 
delivered to my supervisor by April 
21, 20__, for review and revision. 
I will market the tour for 4 weeks 
preceding the tour, with a goal of 
attaining 8–10 participants.”
“I’ll try to deliver 
the tour sometime 
soon.”
3. Achievable
A reasonable person 
would conclude that 
the goal is achiev-
able, given current 
circumstances.
“Given my current practice environ-
ment, I am very sure that I can be 
successful with the tour.”
Does not consider
4. Realistic
Given the resources, 
time, and facilities 
available, a reason-
able person would 
conclude that this 
goal is feasible.
“Given the resources, time, and 
facilities available to me, this 
tour is realistic and feasible to 
accomplish.”
Does not consider
5. Timely
A time limit is set for 
achievement of the 
goal.
“I’ll deliver the tour on May 6, 20__, 
will evaluate the event with my 
supervisor within 2 weeks following 
the tour, and will develop next steps 
within 3 weeks following the tour.”
“Hopefully I’ll get 
this done sometime 
this year.”
Source: From Doran GT. There’s a S.M.A.R.T. Way to write management’s goals and objectives. Manage Rev. 
1981;70:35–36.


===PAGE 420===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
395
Steps Three and Four: Strategic Planning and Implementation
Strategic planning for professionals occurs aft er (a) self-assessment reveals directions and desires 
for career development, areas of interest to be explored or strengthened, and/or performance 
indicators to be improved and (b) goals for professional development are established. Professional 
development possibilities encompass an expansive range of topics and include both profes-
sion-specifi c skills and general professional skills. Professionals may choose to plan strategically 
for development in four areas that have been defi ned by Duke University Human Resources: 
“technical skills, social skills, aptitudes (natural talents), attitudes (ways of looking at things.”28 
Another way of looking at areas for development is to categorize skills as “hard,” or technical and 
profession-specifi c, and “soft ,” or people- and attitude-oriented.41 Both types of skills are import-
ant targets for professional development.
Strategic planning sets the direction for professional development, but the most carefully 
formulated strategic plan is useless unless it is implemented. Thus, steps three and four—
strategic planning and implementation—are inseparable. The strategic plan includes partic-
ipation in activities and personal growth initiatives that are aligned with the attainment of 
desired goals. The professional must consider barriers to achieving components of the stra-
tegic plan and take action to address those barriers.24 The practitioner should be aware that 
professional development plans created for employment or credentialing purposes usually 
require approval from designated parties, often a job supervisor or professional credentialing 
board.
Professionals should document their development activities, including refl ections on self-as-
sessment, goals based on the results of self-assessment, the strategic plan for attaining desired 
goals, and the activities and initiatives directed toward professional growth.24 A simple Internet 
search will reveal a number of professional development planning tools, and many professional 
organizations provide their own templates, along with online recording of professional activities 
and continuing education credits. Documentation should include copies of continuing educa-
tion credits awarded, certifi cations earned, and competencies demonstrated, along with any other 
records that indicate professional growth. Records of professional development should “tell the 
story” of one’s career growth and development over time.
Step Five: Repeat the Professional Development Process
Professional development is an ongoing process throughout the career span. When the timeline 
for one professional development plan expires, the practitioner should repeat the process, begin-
ning with self-assessment and an evaluation of the results of the previous plan. As the professional 
development process is repeated in cyclic fashion, growth in professional competence, and pro-
gression through the various levels of competence, should result.
ENGAGEMENT IN PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS TO PROMOTE 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Profession-specifi c organizations serve practitioners in a myriad of ways, and are key resources 
supporting professional development. Examples of such organizations include but are not limited 
to the ASPHN, the American Public Health Association (APHA), and the AND. Involvement in 
professional organizations can be a fulfi lling and rewarding component of one’s career through-
out the career span, and is highly recommended for PHN professionals.


===PAGE 421===
396 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Participation in professional organizations off ers a number of benefi ts, including but not lim-
ited to:
 
■
Alignment with a professional group that off ers an established code of ethics and a vari-
ety of other practice resources
 
■
Networking opportunities on a variety of levels: local, state, regional, national, and 
international
 
■
Leadership opportunities, including committee/task force/practice initiative partici-
pation; leadership of practice groups focused on areas of interest; writing and editing 
newsletters and other organizational publications; program planning for state/regional/
national meetings; consulting on issues of importance to the profession—perhaps pro-
viding input for government initiatives at the request of local, state, or national policy 
makers; running for and holding an elected offi  ce in the organization
 
■
Services such as professional liability insurance, job postings, mentorship, profes-
sion-related news updates, and a variety of others
 
■
Involvement in profession-wide initiatives (examples include the AND Evidence 
Analysis Library and the National Fruit and Vegetable Nutrition Council of the ASPHN)
 
■
Publications, including scholarly journals (examples include American Journal of Public 
Health, Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior), trade magazines, and newsletters
 
■
Continuing education events and opportunities, both face to face and online
 
■
Staying up to date with new developments in the profession, along with opportunities 
to infl uence the profession’s future
Perusal of organizational websites will provide a wealth of information regarding opportunities 
for involvement in professional development activities. Th ese may include meetings, current con-
cerns and initiatives, and networking opportunities. Table 15.5 provides examples of professional 
organizations and selected benefi ts of membership.
Leadership Development
Chapter 1 emphasizes that leadership development and other professional development training is 
a critical focus for PHN professionals as they work to meet the nutrition-related needs of the public 
and oft en involved in the leadership of multidisciplinary, stakeholder groups to promote population 
health through nutrition services, interventions, initiatives and policy, systems, and environmental 
change.42 In addition, the vital importance of building capacity in the area of leadership skills of pub-
lic health nutrition professionals is emphasized across the professional associations referred to in 
this chapter. For example, WPHNA’s website affi  rms the signifi cance of leadership and scholarship 
to strengthen the evidence base for eff ective action as vital to the fi eld. ASPHN states that developing 
skilled leaders in public health nutrition is a critical component of all their work and provide exam-
ples of eff ective leadership training programs off ered in the U.S. such as Johns Hopkins Maternal 
and Child Health Leadership Skills Development Series; Th e Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 
Leadership Certifi cate of Training; and Th e National WIC Association Leadership Academy.
SKILLS FOR EFFECTIVE GRANTSMANSHIP IN PHN
Collaboration and Innovation
As an expert in the fi eld of PHN, one must constantly remain innovative. Innovation, in other 
words, is at the forefront of research ideas that are funded. To a novice or even a seasoned 


===PAGE 422===
397
TABLE 15.5 SELECTED EXAMPLES OF PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO PHN PROFESSIONALS
ORGANIZATION
CONTACT INFORMATION
MISSION
EXAMPLES OF SERVICES PROVIDED TO MEMBERS 
(THESE ASSOCIATIONS PROVIDE MANY OTHER 
MEMBER BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO THOSE 
MENTIONED IN THE FOLLOWING)
Academy of 
Nutrition and 
Dietetics (AND)
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
120 South Riverside Plaza, Suite 
2190
Chicago, Illinois 60606-6995
Phone: 800/877-1600
Phone: 312/899-0040
www.eatright.org
To impact health internationally through 
nutrition and foods
• EatRight Careers and job postings
• Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
• Food and Nutrition magazine
• Continuing professional education opportunities
• Online certifi cates of training, including a certifi cate in PHN
• National conference (FNCE)
American Public 
Health Association 
(APHA)
APHA
800 I Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001
202-777-2742
www.apha.org
Improve the health of the public and 
achieve equity in health status (APHA, 
2019)
• Sections/Special Primary Interest Groups
• The Nation’s Health/American Journal of Public Health
• Professional development webinars
• APHA Annual Meeting and Expo
• Networking opportunities 
• Public health CareerMart
American 
Association 
of Family and 
Consumer Sciences 
(AAFCS)
AAFCS
400 N. Columbus St., Ste. 202
Alexandria, VA 22314
703-706-4600
www.aafcs.org/home
To provide leadership and support for 
professionals whose work assists individ-
uals, families, and communities in making 
informed decisions about their well-being, 
relationships, and resources to achieve 
optimal quality of life
• Archived and live webinars
• Journal of Family and Consumer Science
• Affi liate membership in state AAFCS 
• Annual conference
• Professional assessments and certifi cations
• Job and career center
Association of 
Graduate Programs 
in Public Health 
Nutrition (AGPPHN)
agpphn.org
To promote the public’s health through 
assessment, policy development, assur-
ance of and accessibility to food and 
nutrition programs and services through 
the promotion of excellence in the grad-
uate education of qualifi ed professionals 
• Curriculum guide for PHN programs (available to members)
• Networking opportunities
(continued)


===PAGE 423===
398
TABLE 15.5 SELECTED EXAMPLES OF PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO PHN PROFESSIONALS (continued)
ORGANIZATION
CONTACT INFORMATION
MISSION
EXAMPLES OF SERVICES PROVIDED TO MEMBERS 
(THESE ASSOCIATIONS PROVIDE MANY OTHER 
MEMBER BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO THOSE 
MENTIONED IN THE FOLLOWING)
Association of 
State Public Health 
Nutritionists 
(ASPHN)
ASPHN
P.O. Box 37094
Tucson, AZ
85740-7094
814-255-2829
asphn.org
To strengthen nutrition policy, programs, 
and environments for all people through 
development of PHN leaders and collec-
tive action of members nationwide 
• Educational training, workshops, and meetings
• The Development Digest: A Professional Growth Blog for Public 
Health Nutritionists
• Health Equity Internship
• Annual meeting
• Publications and resources
• Job postings
International 
Society of 
Behavioral Nutrition 
and Physical 
Activity (ISBNPA)
www.isbnpa.org/index.php?r=site/
contact
www.isbnpa.org
To stimulate, promote, and advocate 
innovative research and policyin the 
area of behavioral nutrition and physical 
activity toward
the betterment of human health 
worldwide 
• Networking opportunities
• International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical 
Activity
• Leadership opportunities
• Membership and job directory
• Special interest groups
• Mentoring
• Annual meeting
National Rural 
Health Association 
(NRHA)
NRHA
4501 College Blvd.; Suite 225
Leawood, KS 66211-1921
Phone: 816-756-3140
www.ruralhealthweb.org
To provide leadership on rural health 
issues through advocacy, communica-
tions, education, and research
• Annual Rural Health Conference
• Rural Horizons/Journal of Rural Health
• NRHA Connect (rural health social networking site)
• Career Center
• Government Affairs Action Alerts
• Participation in committees, councils, and other groups
School Nutrition 
Association (SNA)
SNA
2900 S. Quincy Street, Suite 700
Arlington, VA 22206 
Tel (703) 824-3000
schoolnutrition.org
Core purpose: Well-nourished students, 
prepared to succeed
We empower and support school 
nutrition professionals in advancing the 
accessibility, quality, and integrity of 
school nutrition programs
• Certifi cates and credentialing (Certifi cate in School Nutrition, 
School Nutrition Specialist [SNS] Credential)
• School Nutrition Magazine/The Journal of Child Nutrition and 
Management Learning Center (training, webinars, resources)
• CEUs
• Annual School Nutrition Industry Conference
• Member awards and scholarships
(continued)


===PAGE 424===
399
TABLE 15.5 SELECTED EXAMPLES OF PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO PHN PROFESSIONALS (continued)
ORGANIZATION
CONTACT INFORMATION
MISSION
EXAMPLES OF SERVICES PROVIDED TO MEMBERS 
(THESE ASSOCIATIONS PROVIDE MANY OTHER 
MEMBER BENEFITS IN ADDITION TO THOSE 
MENTIONED IN THE FOLLOWING)
Society for Nutrition 
Education and 
Behavior (SNEB)
SNEB
3502 Woodview Trace
Suite 300
Indianapolis, IN 46268
317-328-4627 or 1-800-235-6690 
www.sneb.org
To promote effective nutrition education 
and healthy behavior through research, 
policy, and practice
• Webinars, including recorded webinars for continuing education
• Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior
• Job postings
• Annual conference
• Opportunities to infl uence nutrition-related public policy
• Journal club
Society for Public 
Health Education 
(SOPHE)
SOPHE
10 G Street N.E. Suite 605
Washington, DC 20002
202-408-9804
www.sophe.org
To provide global leadership to the 
profession of health education and health 
promotion and to promote the health of 
society 
• SOPHE Annual Conference
• Health Education and Behavior/Health Promotion Practice/
Pedagogy in Health Promotion
• Member awards and scholarships
• Networking
• Journal self-studies and online courses for professional 
development
• Live webinars
World Public 
Health Nutrition 
Association 
(WPHNA)
WPHNA
Charles Darwin House
12 Roger Street
London WC1N 2JU UK
To promote and strengthen public health 
nutrition, as a profession and discipline 
with responsibility to understand, protect, 
and improve nutrition-related population 
health and well-being 
• World Nutrition Conferences
• World Nutrition Journal
• Opportunity to report member news on the WPHNA website
• Certifi cation as a Global Public Health Nutritionist (eGPHN)
• Opportunities to participate in advocacy and other WPHNA 
activities
• Free membership for graduate and undergraduate students
CEUs, continuing education units; FNCE, Food and Nutrition Conference and Expo; PHN, public health nutrition.
Sources: From Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Academy Mission, Vision and Principles. 2019. https://www.eatrightpro.org/about-us/academy-vision-and-mission/mission-and-vision-statements; 
American Public Health Association. Our Mission. 2019. https://www.apha.org/about-apha/our-mission; American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences. About Us. 2019. https://www.aafcs.
org/about/about-us; Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition. About. https://agpphn.org; Association of State Public Health Nutritionists. About ASPHN. https://asphn.org/about; 
International Society for Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. About Us. 2019. https://www.isbnpa.org/index.php?r=about/index; Slabach B, National Rural Health Association. About the National 
Rural Health Association. 2019. https://www.ruralhealthweb.org/about-nrha; School Nutrition Association. Vision & Mission. 2019. https://schoolnutrition.org/AboutSNA/VisionMission; Society for 
Nutrition Education and Behavior. SNEB Mission. 2019. https://www.sneb.org/about; Society for Public Health Education. Our Mission. 2019. https://www.sophe.org/about/mission; World Public Health 
Nutrition Association. World Nutrition. 2012. http://www.wphna.org/htdocs/2012_jan_wn2_editorial.htm


===PAGE 425===
400 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
professional, the generation of new, impactful ideas can be daunting. New ideas stem from the 
identifi cation of gaps in one’s respective discipline. An individual may identify a gap, but develop-
ing the solution to address those gaps is most oft en created through collaborations.
Collaboration is an approach so common in research that it is now expected that an appro-
priate team of experts will be identifi ed when generating a proposal.29 Th e basis of collaborative 
research is that everyone involved provides creative solutions to work toward the same goal, a 
broad aim intended to foster a public health impact.30 With a common goal in mind, the diverse 
perspectives and specifi c areas of expertise that make up a collaborative research team result in 
the generation of process-oriented objectives. Each team member is assigned specifi c and mea-
surable tasks that contribute to reaching the goal. Collaboration that supports innovation works 
best when each individual has intrinsic motivation for the success of the work and confi dence in 
their abilities to contribute to the research project being proposed.29,31 To create the process-ori-
ented objectives, it is vital that researchers fi rst establish the end goal and/or aims of the project. 
Only then can meaningful tasks be developed that contribute to accomplishing the project’s end 
goal.32 Th is approach is referred to as backward design and is used frequently as the best practice 
in curriculum development but can be eff ectively applied to research proposals.
The Writing Process
Once the framework of the research project is established, the details can be fl eshed out. Before 
writing the full proposal, there are a few key steps that fuel the writing process.
 
■
Th oroughly read through the request for proposal (RFP) guidelines and discuss your 
proposal idea with a program offi  cer. A program offi  cer is a contact person who is listed 
on the RFP who can advise whether your project fi ts within the scope of the RFP 
or agency. If so, the program offi  cer can then be your advocate through the writing 
process.29 Th ese steps provide affi  rmation that the agency/organization is the best fi t 
for the work. Federal databases are available to see which types of projects particular 
programs fund and to learn who is funding particular researchers (an example is found 
at federalreporter.nih.gov). Foundations typically provide a database of funded projects 
and their principal investigators within their website.
 
■
Understand the written components required for the proposal. For example, the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) format includes the following components: (a) Background, 
(b) Specifi c Aims, (c) Research Strategy, (d) Signifi cance, (e) Innovation, and 
(f) Approach. Each component will have a description as to what is expected including 
content, formatting, and length.33 Th e NIH, for example, provides sample applications 
along with step-by-step guidance for preparing and submitting a proposal (an example 
is found at www.niaid.nih.gov/grants-contracts/sample-applications). Similar resources 
are available from other agencies and will give the researcher an opportunity to read a 
sample proposal before writing.
 
■
Write a generic outline. When an understanding of the required components of a pro-
posal is established, an outline initiates the actual writing process by thinking through 
each component and ensuring that the proposed research will meet the expectations 
of reviewers. Table 15.6 includes some key questions to answer when generating the 
outline.
 
■
Understand expectations of reviewers. Th e review process for each agency diff ers, but 
what is common among reviewers is that they will determine whether or not the 
investigator has followed the written proposal guidelines. Because the review process 


===PAGE 426===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
401
is diff erent for every agency, it may be hard to know exactly what the reviewers are 
looking for. Volunteering to be a reviewer will give a researcher the most insight 
into the process for a specifi c agency, if the agency is a potential key funding source. 
However, sitting as a reviewer may not always be feasible. Agencies have developed 
resources such as webinars, in-person seminars, and even mock review panels 
available online (an example is found at www.youtube.com/watch?v=lzBhKeR6VIE). 
Taking advantage of these resources will help a researcher to comprehend what 
reviewers are looking for and will help the researcher to carefully craft  and target the 
proposal.
 
■
Have someone read the proposal before submitting. To the principal investigator and 
the rest of the research team, the research proposal may seem to fl ow logically from 
beginning to end; this is to be expected because the research team is familiar with both 
the topic and the proposal. However, a critical reading of the proposal by an individ-
ual external to the project will ensure that others perceive the signifi cance and meth-
odology as having intellectual merit, yet can be understood by a person or persons 
outside the collaborative research team. Th e best circumstances are to have someone 
with funding from the same agency or who has served as a reviewer to evaluate the 
proposal.
Grant Management Strategies
Writing the proposal and submitting it is one feat, but once the proposal is funded, then the real 
work begins. Managing a research project is a skill in itself and varies dramatically across research 
groups. Management of a project entails tracking work, communicating with collaborators, over-
seeing research assistants, and making sure the resources identifi ed in the proposal are still avail-
able.34 Th e following tasks may jump-start a management plan for any principal investigator:
TABLE 15.6 REFLECTIVE QUESTIONS THAT ELICIT RESPONSES CRUCIAL TO COMMON 
GRANT APPLICATION COMPONENTS
QUESTION
TYPE OF APPLICATION COMPONENT 
THE ANSWER COULD ADDRESS
What are you proposing?
Cover Letter; Abstract
Why is this work important to the fi eld of public 
health nutrition?
Background; Signifi cance; Innovation; Letters of 
Support
What exactly do you plan to accomplish? 
Specifi c Aims; Objectives
How are you going to accomplish these 
objectives?
Approach; Methodology; Research Strategy; 
Preliminary Work
How are you equipped?
Resources; Personnel
How much will it cost? How can institutional 
resources help?
Budget; Budget Justifi cation
Additional information
Appendix
Source: Data from Bonetta L. Project Management. In: Bonetta L, ed. Making the Right Moves: A Practical Guide to 
Scientifi c Management for Postdocs and New Faculty. Research Triangle Park, NC: Burroughs Welcome Fund & Chevy 
Chase, MD: Howard Hughes Medical Institute; 2006.


===PAGE 427===
402 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
 
■
Identify specifi c tasks.
 
■
Determine the duration of every task.
 
■
Determine the person(s) needed to complete each task.
 
■
Identify potential constraints.
 
■
Decide on order of tasks.
 
■
Develop a detailed schedule (see Exhibit 15.1 as an example).
 
■
Revise schedule as necessary.
Fortunately, many tools and strategies are available to utilize that provide guidance to manage 
a project. Google Suite (G Suite) and Microsoft  Offi  ce, for example, have online capabilities to 
share documents and other tools in real time, so an investigator could share a working agenda 
with multiple people or share a folder fi lled with relevant literature to the project. Th ere are also 
messenger systems such as Slack, which can be used to communicate with all or selected team 
members. Slack has the capability to share fi les, conduct online meetings, and even sync with G 
Suite apps. Providing an overview of the project timeline and schedule of activities will help the 
team to plan, remain organized, and stay on track.34 Certain types of graphics such as a Gantt 
chart and Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) chart can be used and easily 
revised as the project progresses (Exhibit 15.1). Th ese graphics can also be useful to help identify 
potential constraints within the project timeline.
Developing Writing Skills
Writing does not come naturally to most individuals, but like any professional skill, it is some-
thing that can be developed over time. Writing skills start in graduate school through courses 
that require research papers. Th e formatting of research papers is similar to that of a grant, 
especially in regard to identifying a problem or gap that has suffi  cient background associated 
with it.35 Th e understanding of the framework of a research project and the mechanics of format-
ting, such as sections, headers, and citations are learned through writing assignments. Low-stake 
opportunities such as internal grants or volunteering to write the fi rst draft  of a grant for a PhD 
or postdoc advisor is a way to practice grant writing. Th ese grants are oft en shorter in length, yet 
require the same components as larger federally funded or foundational grant proposals. Such 
grants give the researcher an opportunity to practice grant writing and following instructions. 
Additionally, mentors or colleagues may be more receptive to providing constructive feedback 
when they are asked to evaluate a proposal shorter in length. Many institutions have some form 
of writing centers that provide support such as writing workshops for both graduate students 
and faculty. And fi nally, there is a handful of literature to help guide professional development 
in writing.35–38
Grantsmanship Summary
PHN researchers spend their career tackling important public health issues, yet this process is 
much more effi  cient and eff ective if a researcher has funding to support his or her goals. Developing 
an innovative, intellectually sound proposal takes skill but is something that does not have to be 
done alone. Finding collaborators who share the same public health goals can enrich the proposal 
and prove to reviewers that the work proposed is feasible. Th ere are important steps to take before 
writing the proposal that will increase the likelihood of it being funded. Once funded, there is 


===PAGE 428===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
403
EXHIBIT 15.1
SAMPLE GANTT CHART FOR A SIMULATION PILOT STUDY
PROJECT ACTIVITIES AND 
PHASE
RESPONSIBLE 
PERSONS
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
JAN
FEB
MAR
APR
MAY
JUN
Simulation Pilot Study
All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB Submission Draft
Anne, Stan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB Submission Feedback
Deb, Joe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zoom to Discuss Submission
All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Send Qualtrics Access to Anne
Deb, Joe
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final IRB Submission
All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Training Plan for Stan
All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simulation Models Shipped to 
Practice Site
Stan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Practice Simulation
Deb, Joe, Stan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dress Rehearsal
Deb, Joe, Stan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pilot Study Date
All
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Analysis
Anne
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manuscript Draft
Anne, Stan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manuscript Submission
Anne
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB, Institutional Review Board.
 


===PAGE 429===
404 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
a plethora of project management tools to help organize the research team. Finally, developing 
writing skills is oft en not prioritized in the busy life of a researcher, yet one can actively seek out 
professional development opportunities to strengthen writing skills.
CONCLUSION
Professionals who serve the public—including PHN professionals—have an ethical obligation to 
practice with competence and compassion. For this reason, professionals have a responsibility 
to maintain and improve technical and people skills, to stay current with developments in their 
fi elds, and to practice in full alignment with their profession’s code of ethics. Because grant fund-
ing is vital to many PHN initiatives, development of grant writing skills is an important area of 
professional development for PHN practitioners.
Professional development can be a lifelong adventure of learning and growth. Regular atten-
tion to self-assessment, strategic planning, implementation of professional development activ-
ities, and cyclic reassessment is likely to reveal new career directions, new opportunities, and 
ultimately, greater fulfi llment in one’s professional service throughout the career span.
KEY CONCEPTS
1. Concepts of professions and professionalism inform the behaviors and attitudes of pro-
fessionals. Essentially, a professional is one who is capable in a specifi c area of skill or 
knowledge, practices that skill or applies that knowledge within an ethical framework, 
and self-regulates one’s own performance and behavior, for the public good.
2. Th e DMSA suggests that levels of professional development may encompass novice, 
advanced beginner, competent, profi cient, and expert practitioners.
3. Professional competencies and credentialing in the fi eld of PHN are still in develop-
ment, but professional organizations are working toward this goal.
4. Research and data analysis, capacity-building, and intervention management have 
been proposed as key competency areas for PHN professionals.
5. PHN practitioners must be accountable for maintaining and improving knowledge, 
skills, and professional attributes.
6. SMART goals are specifi c, measurable, achievable, realistic, and timely. Time-related 
goals may include both short-term (1 year or less) and long-term (usually considered 
3–5 years) goals. Goals should be prioritized in order of importance.
7. Professional development is a repeating cycle, which includes self-assessment, goal 
setting, strategic planning, plan implementation, and further self-assessment and 
evaluation. Th e goal of professional development is continuous growth in professional 
competency throughout the career span.
8. Membership and active participation in professional organizations form a key strategy 
for professional development.
9. Grantsmanship skills include collaboration with other professionals, understanding 
how to read RFPs and write a grant that meets RFP requirements, and managing 
awarded grants.
10. Grant writers should strive to continuously improve their writing skills.


===PAGE 430===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
405
CASE STUDY 1: PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT: SETTING 
GOALS FOR A COMMUNITY NUTRITION AND WELLNESS 
EDUCATOR SEEKING TO MOVE INTO MANAGEMENT 
AND DIRECTORSHIP
JT is employed in a county health department as a community nutrition and wellness educator. His 
responsibilities include countywide initiatives for nutrition education, as well as social marketing 
for the nutrition education initiatives. JT holds a bachelor’s degree in nutrition and wellness from an 
accredited university. He is just entering his third year in community nutrition practice.
JT’s self-assessment included a review of his annual evaluations, which have overall been excel-
lent. His supervisor identifi ed a need for JT to further develop his skills in food and nutrition educa-
tion, suggesting that he pursue an advanced degree. JT identifi ed interests in the area of social media 
marketing, further nutrition education training, and grantsmanship. He would also like to follow a 
career path that eventually leads him to management and directorship opportunities in PHN.
Case Study Questions
Based on this description, answer the following questions:
1. 
Write two short-term (3-year) and two long-term (5-year) SMART goals for JT.
2. 
For each SMART goal, create a hypothetical timetable for achieving the goal.
3. 
For each SMART goal, describe two specifi c activities that JT could engage in that 
would promote progress toward achieving the goal.
4. 
Contextualize your goals, timeline, and activities by creating an overall strategic plan 
for JT’s achievement of his professional development objectives. You may wish to 
develop a table to present your strategic plan.
5. 
Assume that 5 years have passed. What steps would JT take to review his strategic plan, 
assess his progress, and begin another cycle of professional development?
CASE STUDY 2: GRANTSMANSHIP: NUTRITION EDUCATOR 
APPLYING FOR A GRANT TO TEACH COOKING SKILLS 
CLASSES IN THE COMMUNITY
CJ works as a nutrition educator for a nationally affi  liated food bank that serves 189 constituent 
food pantries in a 22-county region of a state. She has learned of a grant that will provide up 
to $35,000 to conduct cooking skills classes in food pantry settings. CJ decides to apply for the 
grant.
Case Study Questions
Based on this description, answer the following questions:
1. 
CJ decides to assemble a team of colleagues to collaborate in the grant writing eff ort. 
List fi ve individuals who could make valuable contributions to the team. For each indi-
vidual, list two contributions they could make to the project.
2. 
Create two specifi c objectives for the project.


===PAGE 431===
406 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
3. 
In regard to the RFP, what should CJ be careful to do?
4. 
How might the grantor’s program offi  cer be helpful to CJ?
5. 
How can CJ learn more about the expectations of the reviewers who will be consider-
ing the grant application?
6. 
Once the grant application is completely draft ed, what is an important step for CJ to 
complete before fi nal submission?
7. 
If you were mentoring CJ in grantsmanship, what are two suggestions you could pro-
vide to her in regard to developing and improving her writing skills?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. Choose three health professions, and use the Internet to locate their standards for pro-
fessional practice, as well as their professional development requirements. Review the 
standards and requirements you have located. How are these similar and how do they 
diff er among the professions? What overarching principles for professional develop-
ment do you see among the professions?
2. Write and reference a 750-word (about three double-spaced pages) position paper 
describing your views on professionalism and its meaning for PHN professionals.
3. Perform a professional self-assessment using the WPHNA core competencies found in 
Table 15.2. Compare your current development to the standards, using both self-identi-
fi ed data and feedback gathered from objective sources. Refl ect on your own goals, inter-
ests, and plans for the future, and include these refl ections in your self-assessment. Based 
on your self-assessment, what do you see as areas for future professional development 
and growth? Prepare a written document describing the results of your self-assessment.
4. Create at least three SMART goals related to your own professional development. Ask a 
classmate or colleague to review your goals to ensure that they are specifi c, measurable, 
achievable, realistic, and timely.
5. Select one of your own professional development goals and then create a strategic plan 
to attain that goal. Include specifi c activities and experiences that you will engage in as 
you work toward your goal. How will you document your progress toward the goal and 
demonstrate your professional growth?
6. Create a list of at least 10 resources to promote professional development in PHN prac-
tice. You may include professional development organizations in your list. Justify your 
choice of each resource.
7. Use the Internet to locate three RFPs from three diff erent funding entities. Create a 
table comparing and contrasting the three RFPs, including the required written com-
ponents for the completed grant proposal. Comment on similarities, diff erences, and 
overarching principles that you have identifi ed as a result of this experience.
8. Interview a PHN professional who has been successful in attaining grant funding. Ask 
that person for tips, hints, and suggestions on the grantsmanship process. How did the 
person get started with grant writing? What advice would he or she provide regarding 
selecting appropriate funding opportunities, writing the grant, and managing the grant 
once funded?


===PAGE 432===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
407
9. Participate in a writing workshop or webinar. Aft er the experience, write a brief refl ec-
tion on your learning.
10. Create a list of 10 writing resources available on the Internet. At least fi ve of these 
resources should provide instruction for academic and/or technical writing. Justify 
your choice of each resource.
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. When you hear the word professional, what characteristics come to your mind? Which of 
these characteristics do you see as most important? Provide a rationale for your answer.
2. Provide a rationale for this statement: “It is imperative that professionals engage in 
continuous professional development throughout the career span.”
3. What is the relationship of time to professional development? You may wish to locate 
and read the paper written by Brody, Byham-Gray, and Touger-Decker13 for more 
information on this topic.
4. Th e WPHNA has identifi ed three broad areas of PHN practice, along with 10 core 
competencies categorized within the three areas (see Table 15.2). Which of the three 
broad areas might you consider most important? Are there specifi c core competen-
cies that you would prioritize for your own professional development? Justify your 
answers.
5. What are methods for performing self-assessment? What are challenges to self-assess-
ment, and how may these be addressed?
6. What are the components of SMART goals? Describe each component.
7. Describe the process of strategic planning and plan implementation. How might you 
follow up on the implementation of your own strategic plan for professional develop-
ment? How would you document your activities, experiences, and accomplishments 
during execution of your plan?
8. What are some reasons that grantsmanship is a key area for professional development 
for public health nutritionists?
9. Develop your own defi nition of collaboration. List at least three reasons collaboration is 
vital to the grantsmanship process.
10. According to this chapter, what are the fi ve basic steps to writing a grant? Describe 
each step.
11. What are at least three practical methods for improving writing skills throughout the 
course of one’s career?
12. What is the basic goal of professional development throughout the career span? 
Ultimately, who do you think is the benefi ciary of each professional’s development?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Th e Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. https://www.eatright.org.
Th e American Public Health Association. https://www.apha.org.
Th e American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences. https://www.aafcs.org/home.


===PAGE 433===
408 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Association of Graduate Programs in Public Health Nutrition. https://agpphn.org.
Association of State Public Health Nutritionists. https://asphn.org.
International Society for Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. https://www.isbnpa.org.
National Rural Health Association. https://www.ruralhealthweb.org.
School Nutrition Association. https://schoolnutrition.org.
Society for Nutrition Education and Behavior. https://www.sneb.org.
Society for Public Health Education. https://www.sophe.org.
World Public Health Nutrition Association. https://www.wphna.org.
GLOSSARY
Certifi cation: Th e process of providing offi  cial verifi cation of an accomplishment or degree of 
attainment.6
Collaboration: Th e act of working with others to accomplish a desired common goal.
Competence: Th e ability to perform professional tasks in a satisfactory manner. Appropriate 
knowledge, skills, and judgment are considered prerequisites to competence.4
Competencies: Specifi c skills that a professional is expected to be able to perform in a satisfac-
tory manner.
Complementary competency: According to the WPHNA, functions that may be helpful to 
a PHN professional, but would not, if lacking, represent a gap in the ability to carry out key 
public health functions. In some practice environments, competencies normally considered 
complementary may actually be core.9
Continuing professional education (CPE): Th e means by which professionals stay current 
with their professions’ standards and maintain and improve competency throughout the career 
span. In order to retain certifi cation/credentialing, professionals are oft en required to meet 
CPE requirements as established by their professional organizations. CPE terminology may 
vary; for example, some professions use continuing professional education units (CPEUs) or 
other variants of the term.
Core competency: According to the WPHNA, core competencies represent functions that, if 
lacking, would represent gaps in the ability to carry out key public health functions.9
Credentialing: Th e process of granting credentials as an indicator of title, achievement, and/
or other aspects of someone’s background, usually to indicate that the credentialed person is 
qualifi ed to do something.8
Documentation (in regard to professional development): Artifacts saved by a professional as 
proof of engagement in professional development activities and CPE; these may include cer-
tifi cates, diplomas, calendars, products of learning, hour and experience logs, and a variety of 
other indicators. Documentation of professional development is required by most professional 
organizations and employers.
Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition (DMSA): A model of levels of professional practice, fre-
quently used in professional development processes including self- and employer/professional 
organization assessment of performance. DMSA levels include novice, advanced beginner, 
competent, profi cient, and expert.12,13
Gantt chart: A project management tool that may be useful during the grant writing process; 
a Gantt chart uses a visual presentation of horizontal lines to compare actual performance to 
expected performance per time period.37


===PAGE 434===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
409
Goal setting: Th e process of identifying and articulating specifi c desired outcomes to be 
achieved by eff orts exerted.
Grantsmanship: Th e overall process of obtaining and managing funding provided by grantors 
for research and projects. Th e grantsmanship process includes identifying appropriate fund-
ing opportunities, assembling collaborative teams to address identifi ed opportunities, writing 
funding requests, and managing funded projects.
Innovation: Th e process of bringing forth new ideas, products, methods, and/or ways of doing 
tasks.
Lifelong learning: Th e process and attitude underlying continuing professional development; 
that is, the process of continuously learning throughout the career and life span.11
Mentorship: Th e process by which a more experienced person helps to guide the professional 
growth of a less experienced person.
Networking: Th e process by which a professional builds relationships and connections with 
other individuals and organizations for the purpose of furthering professional and personal 
growth, optimizing professional eff orts, and developing eff ective initiatives and collaborations 
for the benefi t of the public.
Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) chart: PERT is a project management 
tool that may be useful during the grant writing process. PERT identifi es what tasks are nec-
essary; who will complete each task; and when each task will be completed. Before subsequent 
tasks can be started, previous tasks must be completed.38
Principal investigator: Th e lead researcher; also considered the researcher who initiates and 
spearheads a particular research project; usually the fi rst author on any publications resulting 
from the research.
Process-oriented objectives: Project objectives that are focused on the process of carrying out 
the project rather than directly on the project outcomes. For example, a process-oriented objec-
tive for a grant project might include scheduling a call or visit with the granting organization’s 
program offi  cer in order to obtain direction for writing the grant proposal.
Profession: A group comprising those who perform a specifi c activity for payment, such as 
medicine or nursing; encompasses a specifi c body of knowledge and fi eld of practice, estab-
lishes a required course of training and credentialing for practitioners, develops ethical stan-
dards for practice and holds members of the profession accountable to those standards, and 
practices for the public good.9
Professional: A person who is paid to utilize a skill; the process of becoming and main-
taining professional status oft en requires extensive education and experience, formal cre-
dentialing, and completion of ongoing continuing education requirements throughout the 
career span.1
Professionalism: Th e skills, behaviors, and attitudes expected of a professional. Professionalism 
may include displaying competence in the discipline practiced, reliability, calmness under 
pressure, fl exibility, problem-solving capabilities, an empathetic and compassionate demeanor, 
excellent communication skills, a neat appearance, confi dence without arrogance, a strong 
work ethic, good self-management and organizational abilities, accountability for one’s own 
actions, understanding and accepting one’s own limits, and acceptance of responsibility for 
continuing education and improvement of skills.2–4,39


===PAGE 435===
410 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Request for proposal (RFP): A document issued by a grant funding individual or organiza-
tion; describes the nature and purpose of a specifi c grant opportunity, eligibility requirements 
and specifi c instructions for preparing the grant application, instructions for submitting the 
application, and other materials such as the contact information for the organization’s program 
offi  cer.
Self-assessment: Th e process of comparing and judging one’s own performance against a stan-
dard of practice; consists of reviewing one’s practice, identifying areas for improvement, and 
planning activities to fi ll the knowledge and skill gaps identifi ed.24,25
SMART goals: Goals that are specifi c, measurable, achievable, realistic, and timely. SMART 
goals are more likely to be achieved than goals that are general and poorly defi ned.29
Strategic planning (in regard to professional development): Th e overall process of setting 
goals, determining time frames, planning activities, monitoring progress, and evaluating 
results of professional development.
Writing skills: A key component of grantsmanship; encompasses the ability to write clearly 
and succinctly, to correctly use expected conventions of written expression, to follow instruc-
tions for written work such as grant applications, and to review and edit preliminary work by 
oneself and with feedback from collaborators and reviewers.
REFERENCES
1. Oxford University Press. Profession. In: Oxford University Press, ed. Lexico. Oxford, UK; Oxford 
University Press; 2019.
2. MPH Programs List: Advocates for Public Health Education. 10 Qualities and Skills Public Health 
Employers Want From You. 2019. https://mphprogramslist.com/10-qualities-and-skills-public-health
-employers-want-from-you
3. Hamilton J. 6 Qualities of Truly Great Health and Community Care Professionals. 2019. https://www
.opencolleges.edu.au/blog/2017/11/06/ca-6-qualities-truly-great-health-professionals
4. National Board of Public Health Examiners. CPH: Certifi ed in Public Health. 2019. https://www.nbphe
.org
5. Commission on Dietetic Registration. Commission on Dietetic Registration: Th e Credentialing Agency for 
the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 2019. https://www.cdrnet.org
6. Wurm-Schaar M. Professionalism: an exemplar for the sciences. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015;98(2):313–
317. doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2015.06.026
7. Hughes R, Shrimpton R, Recine E, Margetts B. A Competency Framework for Global Public Health 
Nutrition Workforce Development: A Background Paper. London, UK: World Public Health Nutrition 
Association; 2011. http://www.wphna.org/htdocs/downloadsapr2012/12-03%20WPHNA%20Draft %20
competency%20standards%20report.pdf
8. Duyff  RL. Th e value of lifelong learning: key element in professional career development. J Acad Nutr 
Diet. 1999;99(5):538–543. doi:10.1016/S0002-8223(99)00135-2
9. Dreyfus SE. Th e Five-Stage Model of Adult Skill Acquisition. Bull Sci Technol Soc. 2004;24(3):177–181. 
doi:10.1177/0270467604264992
10. Benner P. Using the Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition to describe and interpret skill acquisition 
and clinical judgment in nursing practice and education. Bull Sci Technol Soc. 2004;24:188–199. 
doi:10.1177/0270467604265061
11. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Academy Standards Learning Module, Part 1: Guiding RDN and 
NDTR Practitioner Competence and Advancement. Chicago, IL: Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics; 
2019.
12. Kirkpatrick K, Mackinnon R. Technology-enhanced learning in anaesthesia and educational theory. 
Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2012;12:263–267. doi:10.1093/bjaceaccp/mks027


===PAGE 436===
 
15. Professional Development Needs and Strategies in Public Health Nutrition 
411
13. Brody RA, Byham-Gray L, Touger-Decker R, et al. Identifying components of advanced-level clinical 
nutrition practice: a delphi study. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012;112(6):859–869. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2012.02.022
14. Dreyfus SE, Dreyfus HL. Mind Over Machine. New York, NY: Free Press; 1998.
15. Martin K. Th e Improvement Professional’s Evolving Role: From Practitioner to Facilitator to Coach. 2011. 
https://www.slideshare.net/KarenMartinGroup/the-improvement-professionals-evolving-role-from
-practitioner-to-facilitator-oto-coac/13-Dreyfus_Model_ofSkill_AcquisitionStuart_Hubert
16. Th e Academy Quality Management Committee. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Revised 2017 
Standards of Practice in Nutrition Care and Standards of Professional Performance for Registered 
Dietitian Nutritionists. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2018;118(1):132–140. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2018.01.012
17. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Focus Area Standards for RDNs Collection. 2019. 
https://jandonline.org/content/focus
18. Benner P. From Novice to Expert: Excellence and Power in Clinical Nursing Practice. Menlo Park, CA: 
Addison-Wesley; 1984.
19. Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and Dietetics. ACEND Standards Update: Competency 
Based 
Education. 
February 
2018. 
https://www.eatrightpro.org/-/media/eatrightpro-fi les/acend/
standardsupdatefebruary2018.pdf?la=en&hash=F1B92E526A20087889681CD29E3626E790F25BA8
20. McGinnis PQ, Guenther LA, Wainwright SF. Development and integration of professional core values 
among practicing clinicians. Phys Th er. 2016;96(9):1417–1429. doi:10.2522/ptj.20150189
21. Commission on Dietetic Registration. Professional Development Portfolio Guide With Essential Practice 
Competencies. 2019. https://www.cdrnet.org/vault/2459/web/fi les/PDP%20Guide%E2%80%942020.pdf
22. Boud D. Enhancing Learning Th rough Self-Assessment. London, UK: Kogan Page; 1995.
23. Al-Kadri H, Al-Moamary MS, Al-Takroni H, et al. Self-assessment and students’ study strategies in a 
community of clinical practice: a qualitative study. Med Educ Online. 2012;17(1):11204. doi:10.3402/
meo.v17i0.11204
24. University of Nebraska-Lincoln Offi  ce of Graduate Studies. Th e Individual Professional Development 
Plan (IPDP): A Career Management Tool. 2019. https://www.unl.edu/gradstudies/connections/
individual-professional-development-plan-ipdp-career-management-tool
25. Forsman H, Jansson I, Leksell J, et al. Clusters of competence: relationship between self-reported 
professional competence and achievement on a national examination among graduating nursing 
students. J Adv Nurs. 2010;76(1):199–208. doi:10.1111/jan.14222
26. Regehr G, Eva K. Self-assessment, self-direction, and the self-regulating professional. Clin Orthop Relat 
Res. 2006;449:34–38. doi:10.1097/01.blo.0000224027.85732.b2
27. Doran GT. Th ere’s a S.M.A.R.T. way to write management’s goals and objectives. Manag Rev. 1981;70:
35–36.
28. Duke Human Resources. Professional Development Plan. n.d. https://hr.duke.edu/managers/
performance-management/professional-development-plan
29. Jividen J. Writing a competitive research grant proposal. Paper presented at: School of Public Health 
Grant Writing Workshop; June 1, 2017; Ann Arbor, MI.
30. Paulus P. Groups, teams, and creativity: the creative potential of idea‐generating groups. Appl Psychol. 
2000;49(2):237–262. doi:10.1111/1464-0597.00013
31. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social 
development, and well-being. Am Psychol. 2000;55:68–78. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68
32. Wiggins G, McTighe J. Backward design. In: McTighe GWJ, ed. Understanding by Design. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Education; 2005:13–28.
33. Gemayel R, Martin SJ. Writing a successful fellowship or grant application. FEBS J. 2017;284:3771–3777. 
doi:10.1111/febs.14318
34. Bonetta L. Project management. In: Bonetta L, ed. Making the Right Moves: A Practical Guide to Scientifi c 
Management for Postdocs and New Faculty. Research Triangle Park, NC: Burroughs Wellcome Fund & 
Chevy Chase, MD: Howard Hughes Medical Institute; 2006.
35. Ibrahim AM, Dimick JB. Writing for impact: how to prepare a journal article. In: Markovac J, Kleinman 
M, Englesbe M, eds. Medical and Scientifi c Publishing. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press; 2018.
36. Fuller LM. A fi eld guide to medical writing training. Med Writing. 2013;22(1):17–22. doi:10.1179/2047
48012X13560931063636
37. Gopen GD, Swan JA. Th e science of scientifi c writing. Am Sci. 1990;78(6):550–558.


===PAGE 437===
412 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
38. Mensh B, Kording K. Ten simple rules for structuring papers. PLoS Comput Biol. 2017;13(9):e1005619. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005619
39. Oxford University Press. Professionalism. In: Oxford University Press, ed. Lexico. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press; 2019.
40. Th ompson K, Silver C, Pivonka E, Gutschall M, McAnulty L. Fruit- and vegetable-focused grocery 
store tour training kit and grant to promote peer-on-peer nutrition education utilizing nutrition and 
dietetics students. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2015;47(5):472–476.
41. Walsh S, Arnold B, Pickwell‐Smith B, Summers B. What kind of doctor would you like me to be? Clin 
Teach. 2016;13:98–101. doi:10.1111/tct.12389
42. Shrimpton R, Hughes R, Recine E, et al. Nutrition capacity development: a practice framework. Public 
Health Nutr. 2013;7(3):682–688. doi:10.1017/S1368980013001213


===PAGE 438===
16
SUMMARY STATEMENTS ON 
SUSTAINABILITY AND PUBLIC 
HEALTH NUTRITION
SONYA JONES AND DENNIS LANIGAN
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Become familiar with the four interrelated crises of environmental destabilization, energy 
depletion, economic hegemony of neoliberal capitalism, and social inequities that threat-
en ecosystem sustainability and resilience.
2. Consider economic, agroecological, and rights-based approaches to creating more sus-
tainable food and nutrition systems.
3. Evaluate the extent to which current summary statements on nutrition and sustainability 
use available approaches to build sustainable and resilient food systems.
INTRODUCTION
In 2014, a group of prominent nutrition scientists and professionals charged with revising the 
Dietary Guidelines for Americans were directed by the U.S. Congress to not consider any evidence 
related to the environment in making recommendations. Congress had heard that the commit-
tee was interested in gathering information about how agricultural practices and environmental 
impacts of the food system might also be relevant to nutrition recommendations. Why would the 
people concerned about the Dietary Guidelines for Americans be considering “the environment” 
in their recommendations? In this chapter, we put human nutrition in a broad context of sus-
tainability with hopes of elucidating many of the connections between how food is produced and 
human health. We fi rst describe the interrelated crises of environment, energy, economics, and 
equity that threaten the sustainability of the human food supply. We then explore the agroeco-
logical, economic, and rights-based approaches that form the basis of a systems response to these 
crises. Last, this chapter examines summary statements, including the Sustainable Development 
Goals, Healthy People 2020 and 2030, and the EAT-Lancet recommendations against the 
approaches described. We provide recommendations for how nutrition professionals can become 
allies with the many movements for a more sustainable food system and provide case studies of 
communities seeking sustainability reform.


===PAGE 439===
414 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
DEFINING SUSTAINABILITY FOR PUBLIC HEALTH AND NUTRITION
Sustainability is a buzzword in nutrition and public health, and like most buzzwords, it has many 
meanings defi ned by many diff erent stakeholders. From an environmental perspective, sustain-
ability is a way of interacting with our natural environment that maintains ecological system 
balance and conserves resources for future use. From an economic perspective, sustainability is 
the wise investments of fi nances in activities that will generate their own future fi nances. From a 
social perspective, sustainability is the maintenance of relationships among humans that ensure 
security and stability. All three of these realms—environmental, economic, and social—are 
important for nutrition and public health. In each of these domains, numerous scientifi c dis-
ciplines are pointing to challenges that threaten human security, stability, and healthful roles in 
the ecosystems. Ensuring socially, economically, and environmentally sustainable food systems 
therefore is a critical focus for future public health nutrition policy and programs.
The Interrelated Sustainability Crises
While the United Nations Sustainable Development guidelines and most public health nutrition 
literature focuses on a so-called “triple bottom line” (i.e., people, planet, and profi t), here we use 
the Post Carbon Institute’s framing of four-part crises (E4) of environment, energy, economics, 
and equity.1 We briefl y describe the specifi c aspects of these challenges related to human food 
systems.
Environment
Th e natural environments in which human food systems are located are the sources of the energy, 
nutrients, water, and resilience needed to sustain human life. Ecologists describe the state in 
which ecosystems are tending toward stability, beauty, and resilience as “right relationships.”2 
Human food systems “right relationships” would be those in which solar energy is converted into 
sugars that plant consumers can use as energy and, in turn, other companions can use to ensure 
water and nutrients are available to plants. Note that right relationship in a human food sys-
tem, therefore, is not human-centric but includes humans as participants in the system. Humans 
and other participants in right relationship share the risks and benefi ts. For example, a person 
might grow greens to eat in his or her yard using only sunshine and the soil available. If the soil 
lacks nutrients, then the greens will suff er and the person might not be able to eat those greens. 
Likewise, if a human applies compost to the soil, both the human and greens benefi t. Humans 
have found ways to reduce the short-term risks of participating in the food system by replacing 
ecosystem relationships with human technological alternatives. We briefl y describe some of the 
human–environment relationships that require urgent attention for sustainability.
TOPSOIL LOSS
Topsoil is the living skin of Earth’s landmasses. It includes microorganisms, minerals, and nutri-
ents for plants. Th e Food and Agriculture Organization reported in 2015 that only 60 years of 
topsoil are left  for farming if soil degradation continues at the current rate.3 Th e latest assessment 
of land degradation released in 2016 estimated that topsoil losses are leading to decreases in pro-
ductivity of crops, forests, grasslands, and rangelands.4 Wetland areas, such as rain forests, have 
been the hardest hit, with 87% lost globally in the past 300 years. Areas that lose topsoil become 
degraded land or deserts. Th e causes of soil degradation include agricultural practices of tilling 
and pesticide and fertilizer application, overgrazing animals, deforestation, and industrialization. 


===PAGE 440===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
415
Th e soils wash away in the water, creating water pollution, blow away in the wind, become acidi-
fi ed through application of chemicals, or are compacted and crusted.
Some farming and forestry practices actually build soil rather than causing erosion (Box 16.1).5 
Th ese practices include biological tillage, cover crops, composting, using organic matter mulches, 
crop rotations, managed grazing, maintenance of bacterial and fungal communities, and planting 
nitrogen-fi xing and deep-rooted companion plants to provide natural fertilization.
FRESHWATER DEPLETION
If soil is the living skin of land, water might be thought of as the circulatory system of Earth. 
Freshwater is essential for all aspects of human food systems. Nineteen hot spots around the 
world, including California, north-west China, northern and eastern India, and the Middle East 
are all rapidly depleting their freshwater.6 From 2011 to 2016, California suff ered a severe drought, 
in which aquifers receded by 16 million acre-feet per year and 1,900 wells dried up.7 Heavy rains 
in 2017 dropped 228% more rain than usual in California, creating fl ooding, but not replenish-
ing underground aquifers (which would require about 4 years to replace that amount of water). 
Treating waste and stormwaters and desalinizing ocean waters are only partial solutions, as each 
requires a lot of energy.
Some countries, such as Australia, have instituted policies that allow the country to limit 
the impact of droughts through water conservation policies and allowing people to trade water, 
which halved the amount of water used in businesses and residences.8 Other countries, such as 
Israel, treat and recycle a large majority of water used, even sewage water.9 Last, many initiatives 
capture and conserve rainwater. Most expert panels agree that conservation and frugal manage-
ment of existing water infrastructure (e.g., fi xing leaky pipes), drip irrigation, and drought-re-
sistant crop selections that require less water are all required to maintain the availability of 
freshwater. Agroecologists work to maintain freshwater through supporting local water cycles. 
For instance, the role of trees in all aspects of the water cycle is now widely understood.10 Forests 
are the most effi  cient sources of precipitation aft er oceans according to forestry studies because 
trees pull water from the ground, release it during photosynthesis and normal exhalation, and 
capture and slow water as it falls.11 Agroecologists oft en include trees in agricultural designs to 
manage water.
BOX 16.1
HIGHLIGHT ON POLYFACE FARMS
Joel Salatin of Polyface Farms is widely recognized as a “soil health guru.” Polyface Farms operates on 
six principles, which together lead to great soil health. Polyface Farms is grass-based, meaning that live-
stock and poultry move frequently to different ﬁ elds of grass to graze and offer landscape healing through 
their manures, scratching, and hooves. The farm also focuses on the individuality of plants and animals 
by providing habitats that allow them to express their distinctiveness. Also, the farm seeks to build com-
munity by selling only in their own bioregion. Soil building is accomplished through following Nature’s 
Template by mimicking the natural patterns of ecosystems. Earthworms are central to the biological 
tillage of soils at Polyface Farms. Last, the farm believes in transparency. Anyone is welcome to visit, 
learn from, and see the farm. Polyface Farms sells to 5,000 consumers and 50 restaurants in Virginia.


===PAGE 441===
416 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
NITROGEN FIXATION
Nitrogen is a nutrient required by plants and animals to make proteins, including the proteins 
that plants require to make chlorophyll. Plants use nitrates that have been “fi xed” by Rhizobium 
bacteria that live in the root nodules of nitrogen-fi xing plants, such as legumes, and in healthy 
soil. Other symbiotic and associative relationships between bacteria and plants also exist to fi x 
nitrogen for plants, and scientists describe these relationships as intricate and specifi c (e.g., only 
certain strains of bacteria will fi x nitrogen for particular types of plants).
In 1913, humans discovered a way to “fi x” nitrogen using natural gas, creating chemical fer-
tilizers. Th e industrial generation of nitrogen fertilizer consumes approximately 30% of all the 
energy used in agricultural production.12 Excess nitrates run off  farms, impacting rivers and 
streams, aff ecting the biodiversity and productivity of aquatic and land ecosystems. A common 
eff ect is for the excess nitrogen to fertilize algae in coastal areas, which in turn depletes oxygen 
from the water systems and creates dead zones. Th is process is called eutrophication. Likewise, 
industrially fi xed nitrate is present in drinking water.
In the bacterially driven nitrogen cycle, soil bacteria would transform these nitrates back into 
nitrogen forms that are released as gases into the air. Th ese gases are part of the greenhouse gas 
eff ect of agriculture, and greater amounts are released when either industrial nitrogen fertilizers 
or manures are applied to crops.13 Th ese greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by not tilling 
soil and using cover crops over the winter.
PHOSPHORUS DEPLETION
All living things require phosphorus as a key building block of DNA and RNA. Plants require 
phosphorus, therefore, for every aspect of growth including photosynthesis, respiration, repro-
duction, and making sugars. Unlike the other cycles that support life, such as water and nitrogen, 
phosphorus does not circulate as a gas in the air as part of its normal cycle. Th e largest stores of 
phosphorus are found in sedimentary rocks. As these rocks weather in the rain, phosphates leach 
into the soil. Plants absorb and use the phosphates and animals absorb phosphates through con-
suming these plants. Plants that are left  to decay in place, such as cover crops, leave phosphorus 
to be reabsorbed into the soil.
Th e fi rst manufactured phosphorus for use in fertilizers came from animal bones, but mining 
operations began soon aft er. About 90% of all phosphorus mined is used for food production, 
primarily to create fertilizers. Mined phosphorus will eventually become unavailable, and some 
researchers estimate that this will happen in about 70 years.14 Because phosphate circulates locally 
rather than atmospherically, global trade in food also aff ects the global distribution of phospho-
rus. For instance, when the United States imports fruits and vegetables grown in other countries, 
all of the nutrients drawn out of the exporting country’s soil are also imported. Th e phosphorus 
then becomes part of U.S. waste management systems as the food is consumed or wasted. Th us, 
phosphorus depletion is more likely to happen earliest in countries that export agricultural prod-
ucts and do not have a local supply of phosphorus.
Phosphorus can be locally conserved through agriculture practices that focus on local con-
sumption of agricultural products and effi  cient waste management programs that recycle nutri-
ents back into local soil.15 Ecological sanitation, for instance, focuses on both the public health 
goals of safely managing sewage and recycling nutrients back into agricultural systems. Sweden, 
for example, has developed a system for removing nutrients from urine water. Advocates call for 
a plan for phosphorus security to manage the global and political processes needed to make these 
low-tech, low-cost solutions possible.


===PAGE 442===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
417
MONOCULTURE, MONOCROPPING, AND BIODIVERSITY LOSS
Th e Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) 
concluded that land-based species have fallen by 20% since 1990, 40% of amphibian species have 
been lost, and 33% of corals and marine mammals are threatened. Some 9% of domesticated ani-
mal breeds are now extinct, and 1,000 more are threatened.16 One third of marine stocks are being 
overharvested, and 60% are being maximally sustainably fi shed. Likewise, the genetic diversity of 
livestock animals has also declined precipitously.
Insect populations are experiencing mass extinctions.17 In agriculture, particular attention has 
been given to the decline in pollinating insects, such as monarch butterfl ies, which have experi-
enced a 90% population loss in the 20 years between 1999 and 2019,18 and honeybees, which have 
lost 87% of their population in the same period.19 While some insects negatively aff ect the human 
food system, many others are benefi cial. Benefi cial insects not only pollinate plants, allowing 
them to produce fruits, nuts, and seeds, but also keep negative insect populations in check.
Edible plant species are also in decline. Since the 1990s, about 75% of plant diversity has 
been lost as farmers select high-yielding, genetically uniform varieties over local variations 
of plants. About 75% of the world food supply is produced currently from 12 plant species.20 
Diseases can have a much wider impact without genetic diversity. For instance, the most com-
mon form of banana sold globally, the Cavendish, accounts for 99% of all banana exports in 
2019. Th e Cavendish is suff ering from two fungal diseases which is likely to aff ect banana pro-
duction in 130 countries. In addition, the lack of agrobiodiversity leads to a less varied and 
healthful human diet.
Monocropping is planting the same plants in the same land year aft er year. Diseases and pests 
that aff ect a particular plant also continue to grow in those soils, so monocropped plants are less 
productive and more disease-prone. For instance, tomatoes are aff ected by a variety of fungal 
diseases and bacterial diseases. Growing tomatoes in the same fi eld where plants were previously 
aff ected by a fungus will lead to a reinfection of the next year’s crop.
Numerous strategies are available to support plant and animal diversity and include growing 
local, heirloom plant varieties, saving seeds from local varieties, rotating crops, and intercropping 
plants with benefi cial companions. Likewise, converting land to animal, insect, and wild edible 
habitats can support existing populations. Maintaining existing forest ecosystems with large and 
diverse populations is also critical.
CARBON REGULATION
Carbon, particularly the carbon released through methane and carbon dioxide, plays an import-
ant role in climate regulation. Agricultural activities, including animal manures, transportation, 
and soil disturbance all release carbon into the atmosphere and contribute to warming. Other 
agricultural activities, such as food forests, agroecology, and no-till farming, sequester carbon in 
plants and ground and contribute to a well-regulated climate cycle. Forests through both trees 
and soil can release methane into the atmosphere but also sink carbon dioxide into trees and soil.
Energy
FROM SOLAR TO FOSSIL FUELS
In a functioning ecosystem, the primary source of energy is sunshine. Simply put, plants convert 
sunlight into sugars that fuel their own growth and health, feed a host of microorganisms in the 
soil, feed sugar-preferring mammals, birds, and insects, and allow plants to breath in carbon 


===PAGE 443===
418 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
dioxide and release water into the air. Th us, the sun energizes water, mineral, food, reproduction, 
communications, and eco-communities. Across the food system, these complex energy-exchange 
systems have been replaced by fossil fuels in industrial agriculture. Take, for example, pollination. 
In the solar-powered ecosystem, birds and insects adapted to local plants will consume sugar, 
pick up pollen, and carry it to other plants, transferring the solar energy created by the plants. 
In industrial agriculture, honeybees are driven in trucks from farm to farm across thousands of 
miles using fossil fuels to aid the process of pollinating plants. Across the entire food system—
from production, transportation, processing, packaging, retail, food services, to household stor-
age and preparation—the energy inputs are about 14.2 quads (1 × 1015 BTU), which generates 
about 1.75 quads of food energy for people to eat.21
Fossil fuels are used in many agricultural processes, including creating nitrogen and phos-
phorus fertilizers, irrigation, fuels, machinery, drying harvests, seed productions, and herbicide 
production. Between 1910 and 1983, energy inputs into corn production alone in the United 
States increased by 810%.22 Livestock production also requires fossil fuel inputs to maintain ani-
mal confi nements, transportation, and feed production.
RENEWABLE ENERGY CANNOT POWER INDUSTRIAL AGRICULTURE ALONE
Heinberg and Fridley23 argue that renewable energy sources, such as windmills, solar panels, and 
biomass, while important, cannot alone fuel agricultural needs for several reasons: (a) the inter-
mittent availability of energy generated from wind and solar; (b) liquid fuels that fuel machines 
and transportation cannot be replaced entirely by electric power or biofuels because of the horse-
power needs of large machinery; (c) the other uses of fossil fuels to create agricultural inputs 
from cement, rubber, and glass to feed and fertilizer; (d) the spatial distribution and location of 
renewable energy resources will be tied to places where it is more sunny, windier, rivers fl ow, and 
biomass can be grown; and (e) renewable energy sources are unlikely to generate the quantities of 
energy needed to support large population centers.
Economics
THE FOCUS ON GROWTH
Th e current global hegemony of neoliberal capitalism focuses on a model of constant economic 
activity, measured as gross domestic product (GDP), and an expectation that GDP will increase, 
also known as economic growth. Growth in an economy can come from extracting more natural 
resources from Earth and selling them. For example, phosphorus and water are extracted and sold 
in human food systems. Growth might also come from hiring more people, paying them better 
wages, or selling more food at higher prices. In short, globally, the generally accepted economic 
model currently focuses on “more” economic activity rather than healthy, sustainable, just, or 
“better” economic activity.
Several alternatives for measuring progress in a country have been developed that con-
sider greener and socially desirable alternatives to GDP. Th e United Nations tracks the Human 
Development Index as a measure of the possibility to “do and be” and includes life expectancy, 
school enrollment, adult literacy, and other well-being data. Ecological footprints measure how 
much of a productive fi eld is needed to maintain humans and process their wastes. Last, the 
Happy Planet Index combines information from the ecological footprint with expected lifetime 
and life satisfaction to create an index for each country. Rich countries, such as the United States 
and European countries, tend to have high ecological footprints and high Human Development 


===PAGE 444===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
419
Indices while countries in Latin America, such as Costa Rica and Panama, have high Happy 
Planet Indices.24
TRADE LIBERALIZATION
As country-level economies become more and more globally engaged in international trade 
(globalization) as a growth strategy, export-driven commodity agriculture creates numerous 
challenges. Otero and colleagues25 have found that trade liberalization policies eff ectively cre-
ate relationships of dependency in which economically dominant countries, such as the United 
States, import “luxury foods,” such as fruits and vegetables, while protecting grain and meat mar-
kets. Trade partners, such as Mexico, Turkey, and Brazil, on the other hand, have shift ed their diet 
toward more imported grains and meats and produce less of the food that their citizens eat. Trade 
relationships are not stable, however, and global political diff erences oft en create trade challenges. 
An embargo against a country that is dependent on importing basic foodstuff s can quickly create 
a humanitarian crisis. Some countries are responding to the challenge of trade dependency by 
creating national policies of food sovereignty. Fair trade agreements developed between private 
entities, such as small farmers and retailers who agree to a minimum price for a product and a 
better distribution of profi ts.
EXTERNALIZED COSTS
Because of the increasing distances and isolation between fi elds, processing centers, and con-
sumers, many of the costs of agricultural production and processing are externalized. Examples 
of externalized costs in the food system range from the costs of water pollution from excess 
fertilizer and animal manure washing into our rivers and eventually oceans to the costs of dia-
betes treatment and management from excess simple sugar and carbohydrate consumption. Th e 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) explained that the costs of water pollution with excess 
nutrients (e.g., fertilizers) would include the impacts to commercial fi shing, real estate, tourism 
and recreation, healthcare, and drinking water treatment.26 Summarizing the available studies on 
these diff erent areas, the EPA found that millions of dollars of economic activity were lost daily in 
aff ected communities in each category. For example, in one study, communities along the coast 
of Maine lost $2.45 million because of reduction in shellfi sh and clam harvests related to bed clo-
sures in polluted waters. In another, the state of Ohio paid $13 million to treat water from Grand 
Lake for drinking water due to a blue-green algae outbreak.*
ECOLOGICAL ECONOMICS
Th e fi eld of ecological economics brings into alignment the understanding that Earth has fi nite 
resources, or planetary boundaries, and no system on Earth, including the economy, can exceed 
Earth’s boundaries. In the “safe operating zone,” economies can distribute goods and resources 
that support human life in ways that do not exceed the planet’s ecological ceilings.27
Likewise, ecological economics emphasizes that wealth should be measured as the mate-
rial, spiritual, artistic value of things needed to maintain high-value relationships (e.g., fertile 
land and happy families). Th e modern money system of wealth is based on a social agreement 
that banks can create money through fractional reserve–based lending. Th is system could be 
transformed into a living economy through transparent rules that favor communities and have 
strict controls on speculative trading of debt. Numerous groups from the National Association 
* Blue-green algae grows quickly in nutrient-rich waters, such as those polluted by manure or fertilizers.


===PAGE 445===
420 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
for the Advancement of Colored People to presidential candidates have called for debt reform. 
Some communities have responding by developing local currencies, such as “BerkShares” in the 
Berkshire, Massachusetts region that started to support local food businesses and grew to be a 
regional lender that supports local businesses, organizations, and people.28
Equality
CRISIS OF COMMUNITY GOVERNANCE
Elinor Ostrom’s Nobel Prize–winning work on the resilience of social systems demonstrates that 
under certain conditions, the so-called “tragedy of the commons” will develop while in other 
conditions, communities and nations will reliably protect ecosystems. Th rough a series of studies 
on communities that were able to engage collectively with ecosystem resources without depleting 
them, she developed the following principles of governance: (a) defi ne clear group boundaries; 
(b) match rules governing use of common goods to local needs and conditions; (c) ensure that 
those aff ected by the rules can participate in modifying the rules; (d) make sure the rulemaking 
rights of community members are respected by outside authorities; (e) develop a system, carried 
out by community members, for monitoring members’ behavior; (f) use graduated sanctions for 
rule violators; (g) provide accessible, low-cost means for dispute resolution; and (h) build respon-
sibility for governing the common resource in nested tiers from the lowest level up to the entire 
interconnected system (Case Study 1).29
As the Community Resilience Reader1 notes, the ability of institutions to ensure an equitable, 
transparent, and democratic model of sharing resources such as the one described by Elinor 
Ostrom is reaching a crisis. Community decision-making authority in the United States, for 
instance, is aff ected by four interrelated challenges. First, state legislatures use the doctrine of “state 
preemption”30 to remove decision-making authority from local communities and defi ne the rela-
tionship between the state and local government as a “parent–child” relationship. Next, the doc-
trine of corporate personhood allows corporations to claim rights to the protections of free speech, 
search and seizure, and equal protection.31 Th is doctrine allows corporations’ “rights” to supersede 
community decision-making. Th e third challenge is treating nature as property without rights. An 
individual or corporation who owns a part of a river, forest, wetland, or soil has the legal right to 
harm it. Last, the regulatory process in the United States oft en involves a citizen input period in 
which communities are supposed to have a voice in the permits that regulatory agencies grant.32 
However, the permitting process is superseded by property rights and corporate personhood so 
that regulatory agencies are constrained in their ability to respond to community desires.
UNEQUAL DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD
Globally, several widely varying estimates suggest that increases in production are needed to sup-
port global population growth. Other studies fi nd that poverty, or the inability to purchase food 
commodities on the global marketplace, is the root cause of food insecurity. In the United States, 
a country that exports $140 billion worth of food and wastes an estimated 40% of food along the 
supply chain, about 12% of the population is food-insecure or has inadequate income to ensure 
an adequate food supply. Addressing access to food in the United States and globally therefore 
has to focus on poverty alleviation and increasing agricultural production. Th e United Nations 
and International Food Policy Research Institute say that increases in production have to be on 
small-scale farms, using low-input, high-yielding approaches, such as agroecology, to realize the 
greatest increases in food security globally.33,34


===PAGE 446===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
421
AUSTERITY
While the post–world wars period was a time of social development in many countries in which 
a social safety net was institutionalized, several factors have led to the systematic dismantling of 
programs that ensured living wages, aff ordable childcare, food, housing, healthcare, and retire-
ment security. Th ese so-called austerity measures are instituted primarily to address debt in a 
country economy. For instance, Greece cut social security, public worker wages, and social wel-
fare programs aft er renegotiating debt payments with the Eurozone.35,36 In the United States, pub-
lic welfare programs were reformed in 1997, leading to a redistributing of spending away from 
direct cash assistance to individual poor families and toward organizations that provide services, 
such as job training. Austerity measures are widely understood to reduce human food security 
and cause civil unrest.37,38 Alternatives to austerity include progressive tax reforms that redistrib-
ute wealth across populations, debt forgiveness to individuals and countries, and cooperatively 
and democratically managed corporations (e.g., stakeholder corporations).
HOW WE RESPOND TO THE INTERRELATED CRISES
While the interrelated challenges of environment, energy, economics, and equity are daunting, 
ecological thought leaders suggest that we are at a critical turning point in human evolution.39 In 
short, we have an incredible opportunity to reimagine humans as part of thriving ecosystems with 
agriculture integrated into that ecosystem. We have numerous tools at our disposal to undergo 
such a transition, including market-based economic approaches, agroecological approaches, and 
rights-based approaches. A brief overview of the diff erent approaches is provided in this section.
Correcting Market Failures
When a business is thriving even though the cost of creating its product is higher than the price 
it charges, economics theory considers this a market failure. Market failures in which prices are 
lower than costs happen when the costs are being externalized. Correcting the market failure 
of externalized costs can happen through public policy or changes in corporation practice and 
governance. Some of the costs that are externalized along the food supply chain include the costs 
of water, air, and soil pollution; the diff erence between wages paid and living wages; the costs of 
healthcare for uninsured workers; the costs of greenhouse gas emissions; and the costs of poor 
animal care and management. Public policy corrections for externalized costs are oft en thought of 
as fi scal policies that collect taxes and subsidies. For instance, collecting taxes on sugar-sweetened 
beverages to pay for the health consequences of excess sugar consumption is a market correction 
of the externalized health costs of sugar.
Correcting market failures for pollution have been proposed, including charging discharge fees 
and taxing for emissions (i.e., polluter pays).40 Each of these requires a regulatory framework that 
describes what polluting activities are, how much pollution costs society and therefore should be 
paid by polluters, and who all the responsible parties are. For instance, releasing chicken manure 
into a river through farm runoff  might be the responsibility of the individual chicken farmer, the 
corporation that contracts the farmer to raise chickens, or the community with poor stormwa-
ter management. Given the complications of developing regulations for these systems, polluter 
pays policies have not gained traction in many places. Some countries in the European Union do 
charge “green taxes” for undesirable agricultural practices.41
Market incentives, such as subsidizing conservation activities (e.g., crop rotations or forest 
management) or tying the receipt of production subsidies to particular conservation practices, 


===PAGE 447===
422 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
are also used to internalize the costs of ecosystem services by redirecting agriculture practices 
toward environmentally friendly approaches. Likewise, market incentives can and are used 
to encourage agricultural practices that support fair wages and conservative energy use. Th e 
challenge of using market incentives to increase the sustainability of human food systems is 
similar to using taxes and fees. Each of these approaches requires that policy-makers can agree 
on and estimate the cost of the negative impacts of a food system practice and that they have 
the political will to pay incentives or charge taxes to make the market correction. Agriculture, 
however, is a “frontier economic” activity that encourages that the location of production is 
removed from the externalized costs. In short, farmers prefer that wastes are downwind, down-
stream, and off  the farm and therefore do not perceive their impact in the same way as people 
living where the wastes are located. Th is distance between people aff ected by market failures 
and those externalizing the costs of production creates contention in the process of assigning 
responsibility and costs.40
Ensuring the Rights of Nature, Humans, and Communities
Public policy can also be used to develop a legal framework for nature, human, and community 
rights. Rights of Nature are laws that recognize that ecosystems, such as oceans, rivers, and for-
ests, have as much a right to live as humans. Th e traditional framework for these systems has 
been to treat them as private property, and Rights of Nature laws instead focus on the right of an 
ecosystem to exist, persist, and regenerate. Bolivia wrote the Universal Declaration of the Rights 
of Mother Earth in 2010 and ratifi ed it into Bolivian law.42 Following this lead, other communi-
ties have passed laws recognizing the rights of particular ecosystems, including the Colombian 
Amazon Rainforest, the Te Urewera forest and Whanganui River of New Zealand, and the Ganges 
and Yamuna rivers in India.43 In 2019, Toledo, Ohio residents passed a law recognizing the rights 
of Lake Erie. Th e law recognizes the right of the lake to exist, fl ourish, and naturally evolve, and 
gives residents of Toledo the ability to sue polluters on behalf of the lake. Rights of Nature laws 
are new, and as they develop, they are likely to be challenged based on the laws that create a crisis 
of community governance.
Numerous human rights, as elaborated fi rst in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, are supportive of the right to food. For brevity’s sake, we focus here only on the right 
to food. Th e right to food as defi ned by the Food and Agriculture Organization is the right to 
feed oneself adequately. In 1976, the General Assembly of the United Nations developed the 
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). It recognizes the 
right of everyone to an adequate standard of living including adequate food. In 2016, 164 state 
parties have adopted the covenant. Th e United States is not a state party. Twenty-three countries 
have explicit laws that protect the right to food of some or all of the population. For instance, 
Bolivia, Ecuador, Brazil, Haiti, Kenya, South Africa, Nepal, and Nicaragua all explicitly recognize 
the rights of all their citizens to food. Costa Rica recognizes the rights to food for indigenous 
populations, and Colombia, Cuba, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, and Paraguay recognize children’s 
right to food. Another 31 countries have implicit laws that recognize the right to food within a 
broader human rights framework.
Rights to food laws create state obligations to monitor food security, implement changes 
across the food system, and create transparent and participatory processes for enforcing rights. In 
Brazil, the Fome Zero movement created 7,000 local capacity-building projects that distributed 
food, generated income, established urban vegetable gardens, and supported agrarian reforms. 
Th is movement supported rights to food legislation in Brazil. A National Council for Food and 


===PAGE 448===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
423
Nutritional Security (CONSEA) was developed of civil and governmental stakeholders to con-
sider food rights, and a working group reviews all Brazilian policies for their compliance with the 
right to food.
Some communities and countries have recognized the right to food sovereignty. In 2018, the 
state of Maine passed An Act to Recognize Local Control Regarding Food Systems. Aft er the 
state law, cities and towns passed local ordinances in support of the state law. Th e Maine pol-
icy encourages food self-suffi  ciency for citizens through (a) local control, which preserves the 
ability of communities to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume local foods; (b) small-
scale farming and food production to preserve family farms and local foodways; (c) improved 
health and well-being by reducing hunger and improved access to wholesome, nutritious, and 
sustainable farms and fi sh; (d) self-reliance and personal responsibility promotion by allowing 
individuals to prepare, process, advertise, and sell food directly to consumers; and (e) rural 
economic development that supports the environmental and social wealth of rural communi-
ties. Communities that participate by developing a local ordinance are freed from state regula-
tions and some federal rules as well, such as requiring kitchen licensing for selling processed 
foods directly to consumers. Such food sovereignty laws may have unintended consequences 
of decreased food safety, although communities with such laws have not had increases in food-
borne illnesses.
Agroecological Systems
Agroecological systems are designed agricultural systems that integrate social and ecologi-
cal principles and that seek to optimize interactions among plants, animals, humans, and the 
environment. Agroecological projects operate on 10 principles described by the Food and 
Agricultural Organization (Box 16.2). Agroecology is not a new practice, as most traditional 
and indigenous communities produce human food based on these principles, but several proj-
ects around the world have sustainably intensifi ed food production using these projects (Case 
Study 2).
BOX 16.2
AGROECOLOGICAL SYSTEM PRINCIPLES (FAO)
1. Diversity. Agroecological systems maximize diversity of species and genetic resources in a va-
riety of ways. Agroforestry systems organize plants and trees of different heights to mimic forest 
stories and allow for complementary intercropping. Likewise, people and other species eating 
in an agroecological system are eating a more diverse diet, and diverse animal and plant crops 
enhance the diversity of insect and supporting microbiomes, increasing soil health and resilience.
2. Cocreation and sharing of knowledge. Agroecology is local and therefore requires local adap-
tations to environmental, social, economic, and political contexts. Thus, agroecology requires 
participatory knowledge creation where traditional and indigenous knowledge and scientiﬁ c 
knowledge are all used to develop a local agroecological system.
(continued )


===PAGE 449===
424 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
3. Synergy. Agroecology seeks to create synergies across key functions in the food system. 
Biological synergies might include planting nitrogen-ﬁ xing alongside sugar-producing plants. 
Rice paddies might integrate ﬁ sh and ducks. At the landscape level, agroecology uses trees and 
terracing to control soil erosion and manage water.
4. Effi ciency. Agroecological systems are designed to use abundant and free natural resources, 
such as solar energy and atmospheric carbon and nitrogen, to produce food. Agroecological 
systems often have higher yield ratios than other systems.
5. Recycling. Natural ecosystems do not create “waste” and therefore agroecological systems 
imitate this by recycling nutrients, biomass, and water in the system. For instance, deep-rooted 
trees capture nutrients that shallow-rooted annual crops cannot, and leaf mulch from those 
trees can nourish annual crops.
6. Resilience. Agroecological systems have a greater capacity to recover from shocks, such as 
drought, ﬂ oods, hurricanes, or pest attacks. For instance, the water management practices of 
agroforestry and cover cropping retain more topsoil in ﬂ oods than other systems.
7. Human and social values. Agroecological systems value human dignity, equity, and inclusion 
by putting the people who produce, distribute, and consume in the system at the center of all 
decision-making.
8. Culture and food traditions. Agroecological systems seek to reintegrate humans with their 
local ecology and therefore the cultural skills, traditions, and adaptations that ﬁ t locally are 
honored and integrated. For instance, culinary traditions around locally adapted food varieties 
are core knowledge for agroecological systems. Appalachian Americans’ tradition of gathering 
and cooking ramps in the springtime is a culinary tradition that integrates humans with their 
local environment.
9. Responsible governance. Agroecological systems need transparent, accountable, and inclu-
sive mechanisms of governance to make agroecology possible and sustainable. For example, 
land governance would ensure the rights of the rural poor to access ecosystem services for 
 agroecology.
10. Circular and solidarity economy. Agroecological systems support local producers and 
consumers through virtuous circles of economic development that increase incomes of food 
producers and maintain fair prices for consumers.
BOX 16.2
AGROECOLOGICAL SYSTEM PRINCIPLES (CONTINUED) 
Perhaps the most dramatic of these projects is the Loess Plateau in China.44 Th e region was 
named for dry powdery soil that blew in the wind aft er centuries of land degradation through 
agriculture. An agroecology project worked with local farmers to institute several changes, 
including farmers retaining rights to lands they worked, contouring and terracing hills for soil 
retention, planting trees to manage soil erosion, and managing animal grazing. Th e results were 
that 2.5 million people in four poor provinces were lift ed out of poverty as farmer incomes more 
than doubled from $70 per person to $200 per person. Th e natural vegetation cover increased 
from 17% to 24%. Soil erosion into the Yellow River decreased by more than 100 million tons per 


===PAGE 450===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
425
year. Food security increased as not only grain production increased in the region, but also a wide 
range of high-quality and high-value products were grown.
SUMMARY STATEMENTS ON FOOD AND SUSTAINABILITY
Given the urgency of the E4 crisis and the potential of economic, rights-based, and agroecological 
approaches to quickly address unsustainable human food system practices, numerous consensus 
statements of nutrition and sustainability have been released. Here we summarize and evaluate 
the statement from the Sustainable Development Goals, Healthy People 2020 and 2030 goals and 
objectives, and the EAT-Lancet Commission report on human diet in the Anthropocene. We 
 provide Tables 16.1 and 16.2 to summarize the extent to which these statements address chal-
lenges identifi ed in this chapter and use approaches described here.
Sustainable Development Goals
In 2015, the United Nations adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Th is high-
level commitment includes 17 goals with accompanying strategies focused fi rst and foremost 
on eliminating poverty in all its forms and second on healing and securing the planet. Th e 17 
Sustainable Development Goals incorporate principles of agroecology, call for market correc-
tions, and focus on human rights assurances. In particular, the Sustainable Development Goal to 
eliminate hunger by 2030 focuses on the dangerous role of trade liberalization policies in threat-
ening the sustainable livelihoods of people all over the world, stating that to eliminate hunger we 
need to “prevent distortions in world agricultural markets, including the elimination of all forms 
of agricultural export subsidies. Th ose subsidies mask market signals, reduce competitiveness and 
can lead to environmental damage and the inequitable distribution of benefi ts.”45 Likewise, in the 
same goal, a strong emphasis is placed on agroecological sustainable intensifi cation of agriculture, 
in particular, agrobiodiversity.
Healthy People 2020 and 2030
Healthy People 2020 does not have an explicit goal related to the health or sustainability of human 
food systems. It does include objectives related to environmental health, nutrition, and social 
determinants of health that are directly related to the E4 crisis of sustainability. Environmental 
health objectives include a focus on water conservation and eutrophication (e.g., clean beaches) as 
well as a reduction in pesticide exposures. Likewise, the social determinants of health framework 
used to develop 2020 goals employs rights-based approaches to ensuring health, such as ending 
poverty and child hunger and reducing food insecurity. Th e 2030 framework similarly employs 
environmental, social, and nutritional objectives that could address human food system sustain-
ability through public health.
EAT-Lancet Commission on Food in the Anthropocene
In 2019, a Lancet Commission released a report that outlined fi ve key strategies for a healthy and 
sustainable diet using an ecological economics framework.46 Th e strategies included:
1. 
Seeking international and national commitments to shift  toward healthy diets. Healthy 
diets, as defi ned by the commission, are those that focused on plant-based foods and 
substantially reducing consumption of animal foods and sugar.
(text continues on page 434)


===PAGE 451===
426 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
TABLE 16.1 SUMMARY STATEMENT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, OR RECOMMENDATIONS THAT RELATE TO AREAS OF THE HUMAN FOOD SYSTEM 
CRISES IN ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY, ECONOMICS, AND EQUALITY
ENVIRONMENT
ENERGY
ECONOMICS
INEQUALITY
SOIL
WATER
PHOSPHORUS
NITROGEN
BIODIVERSITY
CARBON
FOSSIL FUELS
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
FOCUS ON 
GROWTH
EXTERNALIZED 
COSTS
TRADE 
LIBERALIZATION
COMMUNITY 
GOVERNANCE
DISTRIBUTION 
OF FOOD
AUSTERITY
Sustainable Development Goals
 1. No poverty
X
 2. Zero hunger
X
X
X
X
X
 3. Good health and well-being
X
 4. Quality education
X
 5. Gender equality
X
 6. Clean water and sanitation
X
 7. Affordable, clean energy
X
X
 8. Decent work and economic growth
X
 9. Industry, infrastructure, innovation
X
10. Reduce inequality
X


===PAGE 452===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
427
TABLE 16.1 SUMMARY STATEMENT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, OR RECOMMENDATIONS THAT RELATE TO AREAS OF THE HUMAN FOOD SYSTEM 
CRISES IN ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY, ECONOMICS, AND EQUALITY (continued)
ENVIRONMENT
ENERGY
ECONOMICS
INEQUALITY
SOIL
WATER
PHOSPHORUS
NITROGEN
BIODIVERSITY
CARBON
FOSSIL FUELS
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
FOCUS ON 
GROWTH
EXTERNALIZED 
COSTS
TRADE 
LIBERALIZATION
COMMUNITY 
GOVERNANCE
DISTRIBUTION 
OF FOOD
AUSTERITY
11. Sustainable cities and communities
X
12. Responsible consumption and production
X
X
13. Climate action
X
14. Life below water
X
15. Life on land
X
16. Peace, justice, and strong institutions
X
X
X
17. Partnerships for goals
X
Healthy People 2020 and 2030
Environmental Heath Objectives
6.  Reduce per capita water withdrawals and consumption
X
7.  Increase the numbers of days that beaches are open for 
swimming
X
10.  Reduce pesticide exposures that result in visits to ED
X
(continued )


===PAGE 453===
428 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
TABLE 16.1 SUMMARY STATEMENT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, OR RECOMMENDATIONS THAT RELATE TO AREAS OF THE HUMAN FOOD SYSTEM 
CRISES IN ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY, ECONOMICS, AND EQUALITY (continued)
ENVIRONMENT
ENERGY
ECONOMICS
INEQUALITY
SOIL
WATER
PHOSPHORUS
NITROGEN
BIODIVERSITY
CARBON
FOSSIL FUELS
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
FOCUS ON 
GROWTH
EXTERNALIZED 
COSTS
TRADE 
LIBERALIZATION
COMMUNITY 
GOVERNANCE
DISTRIBUTION 
OF FOOD
AUSTERITY
11.  Reduce the amount of toxic pollutants released into the 
environment
X
20.7   Reduce exposure to DDT (DDE) in the population
X
Nutrition and Weight Status Objectives
4.  Increase the proportion of Americans who have access to a 
retail outlet that sells a variety of foods that are encouraged 
by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans
X
13.  Reduce household food insecurity and in doing so reduce 
hunger
X
Social Determinants of Health Objectives
2.  Proportion of persons living in poverty
X
6.  Proportion of persons eligible to participate in elections 
who are registered to vote
X
(continued )


===PAGE 454===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
429
TABLE 16.1 SUMMARY STATEMENT GOALS, OBJECTIVES, OR RECOMMENDATIONS THAT RELATE TO AREAS OF THE HUMAN FOOD SYSTEM 
CRISES IN ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY, ECONOMICS, AND EQUALITY (continued)
ENVIRONMENT
ENERGY
ECONOMICS
INEQUALITY
SOIL
WATER
PHOSPHORUS
NITROGEN
BIODIVERSITY
CARBON
FOSSIL FUELS
RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
FOCUS ON 
GROWTH
EXTERNALIZED 
COSTS
TRADE 
LIBERALIZATION
COMMUNITY 
GOVERNANCE
DISTRIBUTION 
OF FOOD
AUSTERITY
EAT-Lancet Commission
1. Shift to healthy diet
X
2. Reorient agriculture to produce healthy food
X
X
3. Sustainably intensify production
X
X
X
X
4. Strong coordinated governance of land and oceans
X
X
5. Halve food losses through waste
X
DDE, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; DDT, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane.


===PAGE 455===
430 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
TABLE 16.2 SUMMARY STATEMENTS ON SUSTAINABILITY AND NUTRITION CALL FOR AGROECOLOGICAL, ECONOMICS, AND RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES TO IMPROVING HUMAN FOOD SYSTEMS SUSTAINABILITY
AGROECOLOGICAL APPROACHES
MARKET CORRECTIONS
RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES
DIVERSITY
COCREATION OF 
KNOWLEDGE
SYNERGY
EFFICIENCY
RECYCLING
RESILIENCE
HUMAN AND SOCIAL 
VALUES
CULTURAL TRADITIONS
RESPONSIBLE 
GOVERNANCE
CIRCULAR SOLIDARITY 
ECONOMY
POLLUTER PAYS 
PRINCIPLE
FAIR COMPENSATION
FAIR TRADE 
STAKEHOLDER 
CORPORATIONS
MARKET INCENTIVES
RIGHTS OF NATURE
HUMAN RIGHTS
FOOD SOVEREIGNTY
Sustainable Development Goals
 1. No poverty
X
 2. Zero hunger
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
 3. Good health and well-being
X
 4. Quality education
X
 5. Gender equality
X
 6. Clean water and sanitation
X
X
X
X
X
 7. Affordable, clean energy
X
X
 8. Decent work and economic growth
X
X
X
 9. Industry, infrastructure, innovation
X
10. Reduce inequality
X
11. Sustainable cities and communities
X
X
X


===PAGE 456===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
431
(continued )
TABLE 16.2 SUMMARY STATEMENTS ON SUSTAINABILITY AND NUTRITION CALL FOR AGROECOLOGICAL, ECONOMICS, AND RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES TO IMPROVING HUMAN FOOD SYSTEMS SUSTAINABILITY (continued)
AGROECOLOGICAL APPROACHES
MARKET CORRECTIONS
RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES
DIVERSITY
COCREATION OF 
KNOWLEDGE
SYNERGY
EFFICIENCY
RECYCLING
RESILIENCE
HUMAN AND SOCIAL 
VALUES
CULTURAL TRADITIONS
RESPONSIBLE 
GOVERNANCE
CIRCULAR SOLIDARITY 
ECONOMY
POLLUTER PAYS 
PRINCIPLE
FAIR COMPENSATION
FAIR TRADE 
STAKEHOLDER 
CORPORATIONS
MARKET INCENTIVES
RIGHTS OF NATURE
HUMAN RIGHTS
FOOD SOVEREIGNTY
12. Responsible consumption and production
X
13. Climate action
X
X
X
X
X
X
14. Life below water
X
X
X
X
X
X
15. Life on land
16. Peace, justice and strong Institutions
X
17. Partnerships for goals
X
X
Healthy People 2020 and 2030
Environmental Heath Objectives
6.  Reduce per capita water withdrawals and 
consumption
X
X
7.  Increase the numbers of days that beaches 
are open for swimming


===PAGE 457===
432 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
TABLE 16.2 SUMMARY STATEMENTS ON SUSTAINABILITY AND NUTRITION CALL FOR AGROECOLOGICAL, ECONOMICS, AND RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES TO IMPROVING HUMAN FOOD SYSTEMS SUSTAINABILITY (continued)
AGROECOLOGICAL APPROACHES
MARKET CORRECTIONS
RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES
DIVERSITY
COCREATION OF 
KNOWLEDGE
SYNERGY
EFFICIENCY
RECYCLING
RESILIENCE
HUMAN AND SOCIAL 
VALUES
CULTURAL TRADITIONS
RESPONSIBLE 
GOVERNANCE
CIRCULAR SOLIDARITY 
ECONOMY
POLLUTER PAYS 
PRINCIPLE
FAIR COMPENSATION
FAIR TRADE 
STAKEHOLDER 
CORPORATIONS
MARKET INCENTIVES
RIGHTS OF NATURE
HUMAN RIGHTS
FOOD SOVEREIGNTY
10.  Reduce pesticide exposures that result in 
visits to ED
11.  Reduce the amount of toxic pollutants 
released into the environment
20.7  Reduce exposure to DDT (DDE) in the 
population
Nutrition and Weight Status Objectives
4.  Increase the proportion of Americans who 
have access to a retail outlet that sells a 
variety of foods that are encouraged by the 
Dietary Guidelines for Americans
X
13.  Reduce household food insecurity and in 
so doing reduce hunger
X
(continued )


===PAGE 458===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
433
TABLE 16.2 SUMMARY STATEMENTS ON SUSTAINABILITY AND NUTRITION CALL FOR AGROECOLOGICAL, ECONOMICS, AND RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES TO IMPROVING HUMAN FOOD SYSTEMS SUSTAINABILITY (continued)
AGROECOLOGICAL APPROACHES
MARKET CORRECTIONS
RIGHTS-BASED 
APPROACHES
DIVERSITY
COCREATION OF 
KNOWLEDGE
SYNERGY
EFFICIENCY
RECYCLING
RESILIENCE
HUMAN AND SOCIAL 
VALUES
CULTURAL TRADITIONS
RESPONSIBLE 
GOVERNANCE
CIRCULAR SOLIDARITY 
ECONOMY
POLLUTER PAYS 
PRINCIPLE
FAIR COMPENSATION
FAIR TRADE 
STAKEHOLDER 
CORPORATIONS
MARKET INCENTIVES
RIGHTS OF NATURE
HUMAN RIGHTS
FOOD SOVEREIGNTY
Social Determinants of Health Objectives
2. Proportion of persons living in poverty
X
6. Proportion of persons eligible to participate 
in elections who are registered to vote
X
EAT-Lancet Commission 
1. Shift to healthy diet
X
X
2.  Reorient agriculture to produce healthy 
food
3. Sustainably intensify production
X
X
X
X
X
4.  Strong coordinated governance of land 
and oceans
X
5. Halve food losses through waste
DDE, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; DDT, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane.


===PAGE 459===
434 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
2. 
Reorientation of agricultural priorities from producing high quantities of food to pro-
ducing healthy food.
3. 
Sustainably intensifying food production to increase high-quality output through effi  -
cient uses of fertilizer and water, recycling phosphorus, enhancing biodiversity within 
agricultural systems, and implementing climate mitigation strategies.
4. 
Strong and coordinated governance of land and oceans, including no new agricultural 
lands, restoration of degraded land, and ensuring that fi sheries are managed to support 
healthy oceans.
5. 
At least, halve food losses and waste throughout the supply chain using technological 
solutions.
Th ese strategies advance our understanding of human nutrition’s relationship to the planet in 
many important ways. Th e commission did not integrate a complete systems perspective of the 
impacts of human nutrition on Earth, and future commissions should more directly consider 
that plant-based agriculture, as cited in the report, is a widely variable activity. Some types of 
plant-based agriculture, particularly the types focused on high output and effi  ciency, will con-
tinue to have negative environmental impacts whether the crops are spinach for humans or corn 
for livestock. Other types of plant-based agriculture can actually have multiple systems-level envi-
ronmental benefi ts, such as agroecological approaches that integrate forests, rivers, and animal 
grazing into the agricultural system.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
While each of these summary statements provides critical agenda setting for policy-mak-
ers to improve the sustainability of human food systems, future leadership is needed to fully 
integrate agroecological, market-based economics and rights-based approaches into our pol-
icies. Of particular note is that none of these documents explicitly articulates mechanisms to 
increase community governance of food systems, change corporate behavior through market 
incentives, taxes, or changes in incorporation, or using Rights of Nature laws to protect critical 
ecosystems. Th ese frontiers in sustainability will need to be integrated into future recommen-
dations to fully transition toward a sustainable human food system. Another consideration for 
future recommendations is a reframing of the role of agriculture in ecosystems. Archeological 
evidence suggests that humans have a long history of using agriculture to enhance the bio-
diversity, local water cycle, and nutrient cycling in ecosystems.47 Th us, land and ocean gov-
ernance approaches not only need to rein in the excesses of extractivism but also empower 
indigenous and traditional communities to lead the way in managing their local ecosystems. 
Also notably lacking from these summary statements are explicit actions to develop or main-
tain cultural traditions and values that reintegrate humans into local ecosystems, such as local 
food culinary traditions.
Developing Novel Partnerships for Food Sustainability, Security, and Sovereignty
Public health nutritionists will need to become eff ective partners with several diff erent types of 
stakeholders to increase the sustainability of the human food system. As agroecological prin-
ciples emphasize, resolving the interrelated E4 crises will involve cocreating knowledge with 
indigenous and traditional communities that have wisdom about how to live in local ecosystems. 
Public health nutritionists can develop such partnerships by developing their capacity to speak 


===PAGE 460===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
435
multiple languages, approach groups with cultural humility, and address unequal privileges. 
Interprofessional collaborations are also essential, and novel partnerships could include envi-
ronmental health advocates; legal advocates versed in community, Rights of Nature, and human 
rights; and economists familiar with the variety of market-based strategies that can reform food 
system impacts on humans and ecosystems.
CONCLUSION
Sustainability is a multidimensional concept that integrates our hopes for an ecological, eco-
nomic, and social future. Th e sustainability of human food systems is threatened by interre-
lated crises in energy, environmental, economic, and social systems. Urgent needs to reduce 
human demands for nonrenewable energy, to build soil, to protect biodiversity, and to close 
the phosphorus and nitrogen loops locally are balanced against the need to develop systems 
of governance that allow communities to manage and control agroecological systems, locally 
and more equitably across social groups. Th e global economic shift  toward neoliberalism can 
be appropriately governed through a variety of market-based mechanisms if systems of gover-
nance support better fi nancial and political regulation of large corporations. Th e United Nations 
Sustainable Development Guidelines, Healthy People 2020 and 2030, and the recent EAT-Lancet 
report all make recommendations that support a more sustainable food supply using a variety 
of approaches. Public health nutritionists can support eff orts to create an ecologically, econom-
ically, and socially sustainable human food system by forming alliances with communities that 
are using agroecological approaches to sustainably intensify food production, seeking commu-
nity rights to govern the food system, and demanding market corrections for externalized costs 
of food production and processing.
KEY CONCEPTS
 
■
Sustainability is a multidimensional idea that encompass ecological, economic, and 
social domains. Both equity within human groups and a rebalancing of human rela-
tionships with their ecosystem are required for sustained human life on Earth.
 
■
Th e human food system is facing four interrelated crises: environment, economic, 
energy, and equity.
 
■
Agroecology is the system of approaches that integrates human food systems and 
humans into local ecology.
 
■
Rights-based approaches include developing a framework to ensure every human has 
the right to a nutritious food supply throughout life, protecting the Rights of Nature to 
exist and fl ourish, and the rights of communities to govern their local food system and 
supporting ecosystem services.
 
■
In the current global economy, many of the negative consequences of the food sys-
tem are external to the cost of the foods we purchase in retail settings. Numerous 
approaches, from “polluter pays” fees to incentives for sustainable farming practices, 
can correct market failures such as externalized costs.
 
■
Public health nutritionists can be allies to communities seeking to sustainably intensify 
food production through agroecological and rights-based approaches by focusing on 
cultural humility, relinquishing privilege, and study of ecocentrism.


===PAGE 461===
436 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
CASE STUDY 1: A CRISIS OF COMMUNITY GOVERNANCE IN 
THE FOOD SYSTEM IN SOUTH CAROLINA
Farmers along the Edisto River in South Carolina disagreed with a decision by the South Carolina 
Department of Health and Environmental Control to allow a regulatory permit to Walther Farms 
of Michigan, which grows potatoes for potato chips, allowing unlimited withdrawals of water 
from the Edisto River. Th ey were concerned about the amount of water that would be available on 
their farms if this large farm were allowed to withdraw the 800 million gallons per month needed 
for irrigation. Th e Environmental Law Project sued the state on behalf of farmers, community 
members, and citizens concerned with the environment. Th e South Carolina Supreme Court 
ruled that farmers are free to take as much water from the river as they can. Continued pressure 
from community groups forced the regulatory agencies to set some upper limits on the amount 
of water that can be withdrawn from the river, but the local community has no authority to limit 
the size, type, or environmental harms of local megafarms.
Related news articles are listed as follows:
 
■
Potato farm water fi ght heading back to South Carolina Supreme Court: www.postand-
courier.com/news/potato-farm-water-fi ght-heading-back-to-south-carolina-supreme/
article_9733ec4a-a77c-11e7-a417-cfd683b52b33.html.
 
■
Th irsty mega-farms face crackdown aft er DHEC vote 
Th ursday: www.greenvilleonline.com/story/news/2018/11/09/
thirsty-mega-farms-face-crackdown-aft er-dhec-vote-thursday/1942948002.
Case Study Questions
1. 
What are the human health consequences of growing potatoes for potato chips?
2. 
What are the environmental health consequences of growing only one variety of potato 
over a large area?
3. 
What are the alternatives that community groups have to protect rivers from excessive 
extraction?
4. 
How might a community resist megafarms from locating in their community?
5. 
Refl ection question 1: In what watershed do you live? Check out these tools to learn 
more about your watershed and how it is impacted: water.usgs.gov/wsc/watersheds.
html#Tools.
6. 
Refl ection question 2: What agricultural practices could reduce the amount of water 
needed? Check out the National Resource Conservation Center for ideas: www.nrcs.
usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/nwmc.
CASE STUDY 2: RWANDA’S AGRICULTURAL 
AND ENVIRONMENTAL STRATEGIES
Th e country of Rwanda recognizes the eff ects of climate change and poverty on the country and has 
developed a cross-sector strategy of green growth that includes the Crop Improvement Program, 
the Girinka program, and an animal nutrition program. Th e Crop Improvement Program pro-
vides mineral fertilizers and improved seeds to farmers. Th e Girinka program provides a cow 
to poor farmers. Th e animal nutrition program provides an on-farm mix of forage legumes and 


===PAGE 462===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
437
grasses to raise animals without grazing. Each of these programs is designed to reduce the envi-
ronmental impact of farming while improving the livelihood of farmers. A study estimated how 
much food was available in calories and how much emissions were created by each program in 
diff erent ecological zones in Rwanda. Th e study assumed that 2,500 calories per day per person 
was an adequate food availability. Th e study showed the following results: Girinka reached the 
lowest number of households, but improved food availability the most among poor households. 
Th us, Girinka was able to reduce the number of households with less than 2,500 calories per 
day available by 11%. However, the highest greenhouse gas emissions were also from Girinka 
households due to manure and methane emissions. Th e animal nutrition program reached more 
middle and high food availability households and therefore only reduced the percentage of house-
holds with less than 2,500 calories per day per person by 3%. Improving animal nutrition did not 
increase greenhouse gas emissions as improved feeding tends to lead to less methane emissions 
from animals. Th e Crop Improvement Program reached 94% of households and therefore people 
with all levels of food availability, and it increased the percentage of households with adequate 
food availability by 6%. It also had the least impact on greenhouse gas emissions.
Case Study Questions
1. 
Should the Rwandan government consider total calories available as the best indicator 
of nutrition for people in Rwanda? What else should be considered?
2. 
Should the Rwandan government consider other factors besides greenhouse gas emis-
sions in evaluating the environmental impact of these programs? What else should 
they consider?
3. 
Based on the study fi nding, how should the Rwandan government implement its policy 
for green development?
4. 
Who should be involved in deciding which strategies are selected for green 
development?
5. 
Refl ection question 1: Check out your carbon footprint at www3.epa.gov/
carbon-footprint-calculator. What factors were considered in calculating your impact 
on emissions?
6. 
Refl ection question 2: What if Rwanda instead took an approach like Bolivia did and 
ensured human and natural rights? What programs would they consider instead of these 
three? Check out unfccc.int/fi les/cooperation_and_support/fi nancial_mechanism/
standing_committee/application/pdf/annex_2._implementation_joint_mitigation.pdf.
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
1. 
Start a worm bin (vermicompost) to see, up close, how organic matter is created.
2. 
Research how long it takes to create 1 inch of topsoil.
3. 
Investigate indigenous foodways in your area.
4. 
Volunteer at a local farm, river cleanup, or community garden.
5. 
Grow some of the foods that you recommend that others consume, such as leafy greens.
6. 
Plant a native food tree in your community. Many communities have tree planting 
programs.


===PAGE 463===
438 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
1. 
Agroecological principles rely on trees with their deep roots, tall canopies, and many 
leaf surfaces to create and sustain local water cycles. Look around the place where you 
live. Are trees helping to soak up rainwater? Does your local stream fl ood oft en? Where 
would you place trees in your local landscape to help support better water retention 
and fl ood management?
2. EAT-Lancet suggests that certain dietary principles, such as not eating red meat, 
should be adopted universally across all cultures to support a healthy planet. What 
are the ecological, economic, and social considerations of creating a universal set of 
dietary recommendations?
3. 
Community rights advocates emphasize local governance of the food supply. Look for 
your community’s emergency preparedness plan. Is there a food section? How many 
days of food are available in your community? How might you sustainably intensify 
food production and storage?
4. 
Many people concerned with the sustainability of the food supply get involved with 
campaigns to “vote with your fork” in which they try to aff ect system behavior through 
consumer choice. Consider the example of meat consumption. How would refusing to 
purchase meat in grocery stores and in restaurants change the role of animals in the 
agroecology of communities?
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
Read more about the planetary boundaries concept from the Stockholm Resilience Centre: https://www.
stockholmresilience.org/research/planetary-boundaries/planetary-boundaries/about-the-research/the-
nine-planetary-boundaries.html.
Paul BK, Frelat R, Birnholz C, et al. Agricultural intensifi cation scenarios, household food availability and 
greenhouse gas emissions in Rwanda: ex-ante impacts and trade-off s. Agric Syst. 2018;163:16–26. https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0308521X17301749.
GLOSSARY
Austerity: Th e policies and practices of cutting government spending on social safety nets.
Externalized costs: Costs of creating an item for sale that are not included in the price. In food 
systems, some externalized costs include the costs of air, water, and soil that are not paid for by 
food producers but rather by people living in the communities aff ected by dirty water, poor air 
quality, or contaminated soil.
Extractivism: “Th ose activities which remove large quantities of natural resources that are not 
processed (or processed only to a limited degree), especially for export. Extractivism is not limited 
to minerals or oil. Extractivism is also present in farming, forestry and even fi shing.”48 Extractivism 
oft en involves extracting resources from a resource rich area for sale and use in another area. 
Countries in the equatorial region are sometimes referred to as subject to the “resource paradox” 
of being resource rich but cash poor.49 Products such as bananas, coconuts, and chocolate are agri-
cultural examples of global extractivist economies, where large quantities of bananas, for instance, 
are grown in Central America and the Caribbean for consumption in the United States.


===PAGE 464===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
439
Fair trade agreement: “[P]artnership, based on dialogue, transparency and respect, that seeks 
greater equity in international trade. It contributes to sustainable development by off ering bet-
ter trading conditions to, and securing the rights of, marginalized producers and workers – 
especially in the [global] South.”50
Food sovereignty: Th e “right of each nation or region to maintain and develop their capacity to 
produce basic food crops with the corresponding productive and cultural diversity. Th e emerg-
ing concept of food sovereignty emphasizes farmers’ access to land, seeds, and water while 
focusing on local autonomy, local markets, local production-consumption cycles, energy and 
technological sovereignty, and farmer-to-farmer networks.”51
Globalization: Th e “integration of markets, transportation systems, and communication sys-
tems to a degree never witnessed before - in a way that is enabling corporations, countries, 
and individuals to reach around the world farther, faster, deeper, and cheaper than ever before, 
and in a way that is enabling the world to reach into corporations, countries, and individuals 
farther, faster, deeper, and cheaper than ever before.”52 While globalization has been a part of 
human social and economic development for centuries, with a great increase in the period of 
European colonization of the Americas, Africa, and Asia, globalization as we describe in this 
section is a process that really began in the post–World War II period.
Neoliberalism: A political economy that focuses on free market capitalism with policies that 
focus on trade liberalization, austerity, deregulation, and privatization. Neoliberalism seeks to 
reduce the role of the public sector to create more of a role for the private sector.
Resilience: “Th e ability of a system—like a family, a country, or Earth’s biosphere—to cope with 
short-term disruptions and adapt to long-term changes without losing its essential character.” 
While sustainability focuses on outcomes, resilience focuses on process. “Building resilience 
means intentionally guiding a system’s process of adaptation so as to preserve some qualities 
and allow others to fade away, all while retaining the essence—or identity—of the system. In a 
human community, identity is essentially determined by what people value about where they 
live; therefore, the people who inhabit a community must be at the heart of the resilience-build-
ing process.”53
Rights of Nature: Th e rights of ecosystems to exist, persist, and fl ourish. Rights of Nature 
are part of indigenous and traditional understandings of human food systems and have been 
written into laws in countries, such as Bolivia, Ecuador, and New Zealand. When the rights of 
a natural ecosystem, such as a forest or river, are recognized, then human advocates have legal 
recourse to protect the ecosystem against extractivism.54
Stakeholder corporation: A corporation that is legally bound to seek the best interests of all 
stakeholders, including workers, customers, and neighbors rather than the fi nancial interests of 
shareholders (i.e., shareholder corporations). Stakeholder corporations are a way of reforming 
corporate behavior by engaging a wider set of voting members in the corporation’s decisions 
and changing the primary focus from profi t to social good.
Sustainability: “Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”55 Many organizations focus on 
three Ps to defi ne sustainability—people, planet, and profi t.45 Sustainability requires inter-
generational equity (people), maintenance of Earth’s ecosystems (planet), and the ability 
of people to exchange goods and services fairly (profi t). Others focus on the sustainability 
crisis in the four Es—environment, energy, equity, and economy.1 In this view, extractivist 


===PAGE 465===
440 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
capitalism (economy) depletes natural resources (environment), using nonrenewable energy 
sources (energy), and creating and perpetuating poverty and institutional racism (equity).
Trade liberalization: Th e removal of barriers to the free movement of goods between coun-
tries, including tariff s, licensing, and quotas. Trade liberalization oft en is accomplished through 
free trade agreements. Agricultural products and environmental protections are subject to free 
trade agreements and limit local groups’ abilities to implement environmental conservation 
and social justice initiatives.
REFERENCES
1. Lerch D. Th e Community Resilience Reader: Essential Resources for an Era of Upheaval. Washington, DC: 
Island Press; 2017.
2. Leopold A. Th e land ethic. In: Ndubisi FO, ed. Th e Ecological Design and Planning Reader. New York, 
NY: Springer Publishing Company; 2014:108–121.
3. Food and Agriculture Organization. Status of the World’s Soil Resources (SWSR)–Main Report. Rome, 
Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and Intergovernmental Technical Panel 
on Soils; 2015;650.
4. Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Th e IPBES 
Assessment Report on Land Degradation and Restoration. Bonn, Germany: Secretariat of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services; 2018.
5. Magdoff  F, Van Es H. Building Soils for Better Crops. Beltsville, MA: Sustainable Agriculture Network; 
2000.
6. Famiglietti JS. Th e global groundwater crisis. Nat Clim Chang. 2014;4(11):945. doi:10.1038/nclimate2425
7. Richey AS, Th omas BF, Lo MH, et al. Quantifying renewable groundwater stress with GRACE. Water 
Resour Res. 2015;51(7):5217–5238. doi:10.1002/2015WR017349
8. Murray–Darling Basin Authority. Guide to the Proposed Basin Plan. Canberra, Australia: Murray–
Darling Basin Authority; 2010.
9. Anderson J. Th e environmental benefi ts of water recycling and reuse. Water Sci Technol Water Supply. 
2003;3(4):1–10. doi:10.2166/ws.2003.0041
10. Locatelli B, Vignola R. Managing watershed services of tropical forests and plantations: can meta-
analyses help? For Ecol Manag. 2009;258(9):1864–1870. doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2009.01.015
11. Wright JS, Fu R, Worden JR, et al. Rain forest-initiated wet season onset over the southern Amazon. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114(32):8481–8486. doi:10.1073/pnas.1621516114
12. Pimentel D, Pimentel M, Karpenstein-Machan M. Energy use in agriculture: an overview. Agricultural 
Engineering International: CIGR Journal. 1999. www.cigrjournal.org/index.php/Ejournal/article/
view/1044
13. Munch J, Velthof GL. Denitrifi cation and agriculture. In: Bothe H, Ferguson SJ, Newton WE, eds. 
Biology of the Nitrogen Cycle. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Science; 2007:331–341.
14. Cordell D, Drangert J-O, White S. Th e story of phosphorus: global food security and food for thought. 
Glob Environ Chang. 2009;19(2):292–305. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.10.009
15. Ashley K, Cordell D, Mavinic D. A brief history of phosphorus: from the philosopher’s stone to nutrient 
recovery and reuse. Chemosphere. 2011;84(6):737–746. doi:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.03.001
16. Potts SG, Imperatriz-Fonseca V, Ngo H, et al. Summary for Policymakers of the Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) on Pollinators, 
Pollination and Food Production. Bonn, Germany: Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services; 2016.
17. Ceballos G, Ehrlich PR, Dirzo R. Biological annihilation via the ongoing sixth mass extinction signaled 
by vertebrate population losses and declines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114(30):E6089–E6096. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1704949114
18. Th ogmartin WE, Wiederholt R, Oberhauser K, et al. Monarch butterfl y population decline in North 
America: identifying the threatening processes. R Soc Open Sci. 2017;4(9):170760–170760. doi:10.1098/
rsos.170760


===PAGE 466===
 
16. Summary Statements on Sustainability and Public Health Nutrition 
441
19. Juers E. Management plan for the rusty patched bumble bee (Bombus affi  nis) in Indiana (2017-2027). 
Reproduction. 2017;6:7.
20. Dumaresq D, Carpenter D, Lockie S. Th e human ecology of agrobiodiversity. In: Lockie S, Carpenter 
D, eds. Agriculture, Biodiversity and Markets: Livelihoods and Agroecology in Comparative Perspective. 
London, UK: Earthscan Publications; 2010.
21. Center for Sustainable Systems. U.S. Food System Factsheet. Ann Arbor, MI: Center for Sustainable 
Systems; 2017.
22. Pimentel D, Williamson S, Alexander CE, et al. Reducing energy inputs in the US food system. Hum 
Ecol. 2008;36(4):459–471. doi:10.1007/s10745-008-9184-3
23. Heinberg R, Fridley D. Other uses of fossil fuels: the substitution challenge continues. In: Heinberg R, 
Fridley D. Our Renewable Future. New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company; 2016:95–113.
24. Szigeti C, Tóth G, Borzán A, Farkas S. GDP alternatives and their correlations. J Environ Sustain. 
2013;3(3):3. doi:10.14448/jes.03.0002
25. Otero G, Pechlaner G, Gürcan EC. Th e political economy of “food security” and trade: uneven and 
combined dependency. Rural Sociol. 2013;78(3):263–289. doi:10.1111/ruso.12011
26. United States Environmental Protection Agency. A Compilation of Cost Data Associated With the Impacts 
and Control of Nutrient Pollution. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2015.
27. Raworth K. A doughnut for the anthropocene: humanity’s compass in the 21st century. Lancet Planet 
Health. 2017;1(2):e48–e49. doi:10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30028-1
28. Shubik M. Simecs, Ithaca Hours, Berkshares, Bitcoins and Walmarts. Cowles Foundation Discussion 
Paper No. 1947. 2014. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2435902
29. Ostrom E. Design principles of robust property-rights institutions: what have we learned. 2008.
30. Weiland PS. Federal and state preemption of environmental law: a critical analysis. Harv Environ Law 
Rev. 2000;24:237.
31. Ripken SK. Corporations are people too: a multi-dimensional approach to the corporate personhood 
puzzle. Fordham J Corp Financ Law. 2009;15:97.
32. Godschalk DR, Brody S, Burby R. Public participation in natural hazard mitigation policy formation: 
challenges for comprehensive planning. J Environ Plann Manag. 2003;46(5):733–754.
33. Delgado CL, Narrod CA, Tiongco MM, de Camargo Barros GSA. Determinants and Implications of the 
Growing Scale of Livestock Farms in Four Fast-Growing Developing Countries. Vol. 157. Washington, DC: 
International Food Policy Research Institute; 2008.
34. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. Trade and Environment Review 2013: Wake Up 
Before It’s Too Late. Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 2013.
35. Ifanti AA, Argyriou AA, Kalofonou FH, Kalofonos HP. Financial crisis and austerity measures in Greece: 
their impact on health promotion policies and public health care. Health Policy. 2013;113(1–2):8–12. 
doi:10.1016/j.healthpol.2013.05.017
36. Pappas TS, O’Malley E. Civil compliance and “political Luddism” explaining variance in social unrest 
during crisis in Ireland and Greece. Am Behav Sci. 2014;58(12):1592–1613. doi:10.1177/000276421
4534663
37. Dowler E, Lambie-Mumford H. Introduction: hunger, food and social policy in austerity. Soc Policy Soc. 
2015;14(3):411–415. doi:10.1017/S1474746415000159
38. Stuckler D, Basu S. How austerity kills. Th e New York Times. May 12, 2013.
39. Macy J, Johnstone C. Active Hope: How to Face the Mess We’re in Without Going Crazy. Novato, CA: New 
World Library; 2012.
40. Buttel FH. Internalizing the societal costs of agricultural production. Plant Physiol. 2003;133(4):1656–
1665. doi:10.1104/pp.103.030312
41. Albrecht J. Th e use of consumption taxes to re-launch green tax reforms. Int Rev Law Econ. 2006;26(1):88–
103. doi:10.1016/j.irle.2006.05.007
42. Vidal J. Bolivia enshrines natural world’s rights with equal status for Mother Earth. Th e Guardian. April 
10, 2011.
43. Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund. Rights of Lake Erie Recognized in Historic Vote. 2019. 
https://celdf.org/2019/02/rights-of-lake-erie-recognized-in-historic-vote
44. Zhao G, Mu X, Wen Z, et al. Soil erosion, conservation, and eco‐environment changes in the Loess 
Plateau of China. Land Degrad Dev. 2013;24(5):499–510. doi:10.1002/ldr.2246


===PAGE 467===
442 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
45. United Nations General Assembly. Sustainable development goals. Transforming Our World: Th e 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development. 2015. https://www.unfpa.org/resources/transforming-our-world-
2030-agenda-sustainable-development
46. Willett W, Rockström J, Loken B, et al. Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT–Lancet Commission on 
healthy diets from sustainable food systems. Th e Lancet. 2019;393(10170):447–492.
47. Denevan WM. Cultivated Landscapes of Native Amazonia and the Andes. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press on Demand; 2003.
48. Acosta A. Extractivism and neoextractivism: two sides of the same curse. In: Lang M, Mokrani D, 
eds. Beyond Development: Alternative Visions From Latin America. Amsterdam, Th e Netherlands: 
Transnational Institute; 2013:61–86. 
49. McKay BM. Agrarian extractivism in Bolivia. World Dev. 2017;97:199–211. doi:10.1016/j
.worlddev.2017.04.007
50. World Trade Organization. Who We Are: Defi nition of Fair Trade. wft o.com/who-we-are
51. Altieri MA. Agroecology, small farms, and food sovereignty. Mon Rev. 2009;61(3):102–113. doi:10.14452/
MR-061-03-2009-07_8
52. Friedman TL. Th e Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux; 2000.
53. Lerch D. Six foundations for building community resilience. In: Lerch D, ed. Th e Community Resilience 
Reader. New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company; 2017:9–42.
54. Andrade PA. Th e government of nature: post-neoliberal environmental governance in Bolivia and 
Ecuador. In: de Castro F, Hogenboom B, Baud M, eds. Environmental Governance in Latin America. 
London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan; 2016:113–136.
55. Brundtland GH, Khalid M, Agnelli S, Al-Athel S. Our Common Future. New York, NY: United Nations; 
1987.


===PAGE 468===
17
FUTURE CHALLENGES, TRENDS, 
AND OPPORTUNITIES
GIZEM TEMPLETON, NIHAL DESTAN AYTEKIN HATIK, AND 
HILARY A. CAMPBELL
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Understand and explain future trends in population growth, urbanization, and climate 
change.
2. Describe specifi c challenges that will need to be addressed in the global food system.
3. List several new approaches or agricultural technologies that have been proposed to ad-
dress these challenges.
INTRODUCTION
Humans evolved while hunting and gathering what was available in their surrounding environ-
ment. Th e beginnings of agriculture—planting, tending, and harvesting foods—changed hunting/
gathering lifeways and allowed larger groups of people to live in one place. As a result, the food 
supply became more stable and manageable. More recently, food industrialization had changed 
food lifeways in ways that are just as signifi cant. Today, more people on the planet have access to 
food that is grown elsewhere through trade and/or food aid than ever before. Th is globalization 
and commodifi cation of food makes understanding the global food system more complex, and 
more diffi  cult to predict and forecast.
Of particular concern is that the global food system does not feed people equitably or sus-
tainably. According to the 2019 Revision of World Population Prospects, the world population 
is estimated to reach 9.7 billion in 2050 and 10.9 billion by the end of the century.1 Th e esti-
mated population growth adds further pressure to the global food system. In this fi nal chapter, we 
describe the challenges and opportunities in growing enough food for all people to live a healthy 
life. We also address the sustainability of agriculture, the equitable distribution and access to food 
by all humans, and the reciprocal relationship between climate change and farming practices.
GLOBAL HEALTH TRENDS
Set against the backdrop of feeding an ever-increasing world population, supplying food for all peo-
ple, with diversifi ed diets, is an issue of global concern. Aft er succeeding in reducing the number 


===PAGE 469===
444 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
of people living with chronic hunger over the past several decades, we have reached a stumbling 
point. Beginning in 2015,2 the trend of success in eliminating hunger has reversed and each year 
the number of people going hungry increases. As we are writing this chapter, over 820 million 
people are chronically hungry, and this number is rising globally.3 Ongoing hunger has severe 
consequences, especially on vulnerable populations such as infants and young children. Forty-fi ve 
percent of the deaths in children under 5 years of age are attributed to maternal and child malnu-
trition. Globally, almost 50 million children are wasted and 149 million children are stunted.2
Hidden hunger, also known as micronutrient defi ciencies, aff ects an estimated 2 billion peo-
ple worldwide.4 Th e most common micronutrient defi ciencies are iron, zinc, iodine, folate, and 
vitamin A. Such micronutrient defi ciencies may lead to cognitive and physical disability; prevent-
able blindness; diseases and conditions such as diarrhea, anemia, stunting, and even death.4
One in three women of reproductive age suff ers from iron defi ciency anemia.2 Iron defi ciency 
leads to impaired cognitive abilities that cannot be reversed. Anemia aff ects 800 million women 
and children globally, and iron defi ciency causes the vast majority of anemia. Zinc defi ciency 
increases the rate of stunting, puts 1 billion people at risk, and causes 116,000 deaths of children 
under 5 years of age per year.5 Vitamin A defi ciency causes night blindness for almost 10 million 
pregnant women and 5.2 million children and 105,700 childhood deaths annually.6
At the same time, overweight and obesity are also rising. About 2 billion adults, 40 million 
children under 5 years of age, and 338 million children aged 5 to 18 are overweight.2 Th e over-
weight and obesity problem is no longer just a high-income county problem. Low-income coun-
tries are also facing these challenges, particularly as industrialized and commodity foods spread 
across the globe. Chronic hunger and obesity are oft en concurrent problems.
Th e combination of these three forms of malnutrition (hunger, micronutrient defi ciency, and 
overnutrition), which can be observed in the same country’s context or even at the household 
or the individual level, is called the triple burden of malnutrition. Th e global nutrition index 
is a useful tool for understanding the triple burden of malnutrition as a single statistic at the 
national, regional, and global levels. Th e global nutrition index uses three metrics of (a) protein–
energy malnutrition, (b) micronutrient defi ciency, and (c) obesity (% female obesity). Th e global 
nutrition index analysis for 1990–2015 (calculated for 186 countries) shows a decreasing trend 
in undernutrition but increased overnutrition.7 Th e triple burden of malnutrition is considered 
to be a global emergency. Th e Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates the cost of 
malnutrition as US$3.5 trillion per year, translating into US$500 per individual.8
Th e prevalence of hunger and overnutrition diff ers depending on the region, country, city, 
and even postal zip codes. Figure 17.1 shows how variable hunger and obesity are dependent on 
the region.9 To generalize, it appears that once a region starts curbing the hunger problem, the 
obesity problem picks up. Th is is largely due to a concept called nutrition transition, defi ned by 
Popkin10 as the shift  toward a Western-style diet higher in fat, sugar, and refi ned carbohydrates 
and lower levels of physical activity, which comes as a result of economic, epidemiological, and 
demographic transition. Although overweight and obesity were once a developed country issue, 
rising incomes and changing consumption patterns are now resulting in increasing obesity in 
developing countries as well.
Rapid urbanization and discrepancies in purchasing power are some of the main drivers in the 
nutrition transition. As a result, populations begin to exhibit an upward trend toward overweight 
and obesity as well as diet-related noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) in urban areas. Healthy 
diets in urban areas can be expensive and hard to access.11
As cities continue to grow, low-income segments of the urban population in particular can 
fi nd it diffi  cult to aff ord healthy diets. More than half of the world population today lives in urban 


===PAGE 470===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
445
areas, compared to only one in three people as recently as 1950. By 2050, the urban population 
is forecasted to be 68% globally. And, as urbanization continues to rise, land and labor dedicated 
for agriculture will also be reduced. Th is adds a further dimension of complexity to the challenge 
of global nutrition.12
According to the Lancet Global Burden of Disease report, NCDs cause 11 million deaths a 
year as a consequence of inadequate diets.13 Th e Lancet team selected 15 dietary risk factors and 
looked at the impact of such variables on mortality across 195 nations. Th e Lancet team found 
that diets low in whole grains, low in fruits, and high in sodium may be the cause of more than 
50% of mortality rates due to NCDs. Th e team estimated that improving dietary intake of popula-
tions could prevent one in fi ve deaths globally.13 Th e EAT-Lancet commission report presented 
a framework to reach optimal dietary intake while also focusing on sustainability of food produc-
tion worldwide.14 Neither sustainable agriculture nor optimal diets are possible without taking a 
holistic food-system approach, engaging multiple stakeholders, and a strong commitment.
By 2050, we need to have solutions and systems in place that can feed an estimated 10 billion 
people. We know that healthy diets play an important role not only for the sustained health of 
individuals but also for the overall well-being and prosperity of human society.15 Th e lack of sus-
tainable and scalable solutions to global hunger has serious consequences.
FOOD SYSTEMS AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
As explained in detail in Chapter 4, Behavioral Aspects of Public Health Nutrition, a food system 
consists of everything that happens in the food chain: growing, harvesting, processing, packag-
ing, distributing, consuming, and disposal of food. Th e global food system encompasses multiple 
FIGURE 17.1 Undernourishment and obesity rates per region.
Source: From World Bank Group. Ending Poverty and Hunger by 2030: An Agenda for the Global Food System. Washing-
ton, DC: World Bank Group; 2015. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21771 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
Undernourished
25
20
Sub-Saharan
Africa
15
10
5
0
Share of the population (%)
Obese
South Asia
East Asia
and the 
Pacific
Latin America
and the
Caribbean
Europe and
Central
Asia
Middle East
and North
Africa


===PAGE 471===
446 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
other systems, such as the agricultural system, water system, energy system, and fi nancial system. 
Multiple food systems—from local to regional to global—coexist, interact, and impact each other. 
Socioeconomic, political, and economic factors all drive food systems and aff ect human health 
and well-being. With the advancements in the industrialization of food, a “conventional” food 
system has emerged. A conventional food system mainly focuses on increasing the yield and pro-
duction of agricultural and horticultural crops while reducing the cost of food.16
Recently, a desire toward alternative food systems has also emerged. Th e complexity and inter-
connectedness of the food system calls for a holistic approach to achieve a more sustainable food 
system, that is, supply safe, aff ordable, and adequately nutritious food for all. We also need food 
systems that preserve the environment and are resilient in the face of unforeseen challenges. In 
this section, we describe the challenges created by the conventional food system, from food waste 
to climate change to loss of biodiversity, and an alternative model called agroecology. We also 
present diff erent scenarios of the future proposed by the World Economic Forum.
Food Loss and Food Waste
As a result of food loss or food waste, we currently fail to use an estimated one third of our 
food produced globally. Food loss occurs during the initial parts of the food chain (e.g., growth, 
harvesting, processing) whereas food waste happens at the retail and consumption levels.17 In 
either scenario, the overall food system is damaged, whether in the form of missed opportunity 
to increase access to nutritious food, unnecessary contribution to greenhouse gas emissions, or 
depleted soil resources. Food loss is more common in low-income countries, whereas food waste 
happens more in middle-income to higher income countries. Since there are multiple potential 
reasons for food loss, diff erent approaches should be used to combat this problem.
Food loss, mainly occurring in the developing world, may be minimized by focusing on pro-
ducer needs. Food producers need public or private investment in infrastructure, storage, and 
processing facilities, connecting growers with markets to sell their products, as well as increasing 
knowledge and capacity of food chain workers to handle food safely.17
Food waste, on the other hand, could be minimized by focusing on retailer and consumer 
attitudes. In high-income countries, there are more food/calories produced than the population 
needs. Th is results in food waste down the food chain.17 Th is may occur by stocking shelves of 
supermarkets with more food than what can be sold by “sell-by” dates, discarding food products 
due to minor cosmetic deviations, or the processing facilities or consumers being able to “aff ord” 
to waste foods due to their income level or through processing ineffi  ciencies. Increasing public 
awareness may curb the majority of these problems and could signifi cantly reduce food waste. 
For example, although more food is being produced relative to population needs in more affl  uent 
countries, not all citizens can aff ord the foods. More attention is being paid to this challenge by 
transporting foods to people who could otherwise not aff ord it, donations to soup kitchens and 
food pantries, or selling so-called ugly produce at a bargain price next to the standard-looking 
produce in the aisle.18
Effect of Agrochemicals
To keep pace with the demand for food in the 20th century, rapid increases in agricultural pro-
duction were driven largely by advances in agrochemicals such as pesticides and fertilizers. 
However, these chemicals are now known to be associated with negative health eff ects on exposed 
agricultural workers, negative eff ects on aquatic life exposed to agricultural runoff , as well as ben-
efi cial pollinators such as bees and animals upstream in the food chain such as birds and small 


===PAGE 472===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
447
mammals.19 Th e global need for fresh water already strains the system, and the need to safeguard 
water quality and reduce contamination and runoff  will deepen.19
Increased Urban Farming
Urban farming may also become more common as population density increases, putting pres-
sure on agricultural land availability.20 Increasing urbanization alongside increasing population 
growth is likely to infringe on agricultural land adjacent to current urban areas. Researchers have 
estimated 1.8% to 2.4% of global croplands, particularly in Asia and Africa, could be lost to urban 
expansion by 2030.21 Urban food production could result in lowering the energy burden of agri-
culture by reducing the need for long-distance transportation and large-scale storage, among 
other mechanisms. However, care would have to be taken to avoid unintended consequences, 
such as increased energy demand for water treatment and distribution in urban environments as 
compared to traditional croplands.22
Climate Change
Climate change is now recognized as one of the world’s most signifi cant public health chal-
lenges. Our collective future and global food security are threatened by climate change because it 
adversely aff ects biodiversity and rising carbon dioxide levels are projected to cause plants/crops 
to lose nutrition levels by 17% when compared with current conditions.23
In addition, the temperature of the Earth is rising, caused in part by increased carbon dioxide 
levels in the atmosphere.24 Th e Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)25 estimates 
global warming will reach 1.5°C above preindustrial levels between 2030 and 2052 if warming 
continues at the current rate. Th is could cause increased average temperatures both on land and 
in the ocean, heavy precipitation in some places, and droughts in other places.25 Continued rising 
temperatures will lead to higher sea levels, changes in rainfall patterns, and potentially an increase 
in extreme weather events.24 Without substantial eff orts to limit global warming, rising global 
temperatures will cause increasingly catastrophic results.26
Crop Yield
An early simulation predicted that crop yield may increase due to higher levels of carbon dioxide 
available for use in photosynthesis. However, more recent simulations indicate crop yield will 
likely decrease, especially across tropical areas that overlap with regions that are already strug-
gling with food insecurity such as South Asia and Central Africa.24 A systematic review suggests 
that staple crop yields of wheat, maize, sorghum, and millet would be more adversely impacted 
than rice, cassava, and sugarcane. Rural areas will be disproportionately aff ected in terms of water 
availability, food security, and agriculture due in part to shift ing locations of food production.25
Changes in Nutritional Value
Increased carbon dioxide will aff ect the nutritional value of some crops, including wheat, rice, 
potatoes, soy, and peas Th ese staple crops provide much of the protein and micronutrients in the 
diets of people in low-income countries.27 Changes in the nutritional value of just these crops 
are predicted to result in an additional 175 million people to become zinc-defi cient. Further, an 
estimated 4 billion women of childbearing age and children under 5 years of age in countries 
already struggling with the prevalence of more than 20% anemia would lose more than 4% of 
dietary iron intake.13


===PAGE 473===
448 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Livestock Production and Meat Reliance in Diets
Th e IPCC predicts that livestock production will be adversely aff ected as a result of global warm-
ing eff ects on feed quality, spread of diseases, and reduced water resource availability. Fisheries 
and agroforestry will also be aff ected.27 In high- and middle-income countries and in urban areas, 
among populations, meat consumption generally has been increasing. Th e FAO data also show a 
rapid increase in meat consumption whereas a slower increase is shown for fruits and vegetables.28
Th e EAT-Lancet Commission suggests limiting production/consumption of red meat as pro-
duction causes signifi cant greenhouse gas emission.14 Another reason for this recommendation 
is that a portion of the cattle feed could be converted into edible foods for humans. Lastly, the 
production of feed grain creates its own environmental impact. To date, studies on crop yield 
changes due to climate change have not rigorously addressed grassland productivity and livestock 
feed needs. Neither have researchers quantifi ed the potential impact of increased extreme weather 
events on livestock production.24 Some researchers advocate for decreased livestock production 
and decreased consumption of animal protein. Th ey argue that livestock are a diffi  cult-to-miti-
gate source of increased greenhouse gases that stimulate global warming and climate change.25 
Th is group advocates increased uptake of plant-based diets and vegetable protein consumption. 
Insects have also been proposed as a sustainable alternative protein source.20
Alternative Systems: Agroecology
Another signifi cant concern for the food and nutrition security agenda is the global syndemic of 
obesity, undernutrition, and climate change. Food systems are signifi cant contributors to this syn-
demic. Healthy diets tend to be expensive and more challenging for people to access.11 Our global 
engagement with both climate change and food security/nutrition needs to be reshaped, bringing 
in specifi c attention to equity issues, sustainability, and environmental impact. It is crucial to 
understand the interlinkage of climate change and the food system so that systematic and holistic 
solutions can be developed. Agroecology as an alternative to industrial food systems promises to 
deliver these ambitious goals.29
Th ough agroecology has multiple defi nitions, it can be broadly defi ned as a holistic agricul-
tural system that encompasses ecological, social, political, and economical dimensions to result 
in a sustainable and resilient food system. Agroecology is a circular system, keeping an ecological 
approach at its heart to mimic natural cycles, such as water and nitrogen cycles. At the same time, 
agroecology supporters believe that a sustainable food system cannot be achieved in the absence 
of food sovereignty. Agroecology prioritizes diversity over uniformity and equity over the accu-
mulation of wealth in the hands of a small number of corporations.29
Future Food-System Scenarios
Th e World Economic Forum, with multiple partners, created a scenario analysis report for the 
future of global food systems.30 Taking into consideration predictable trends and critical uncer-
tainties, this report highlights the issue that the global food system change can follow many 
diff erent trajectories. Th ough it is not possible to predict with certainty, a scenario analysis of 
these diff erent directions may guide planning and decision-making processes moving forward. 
Th e World Economic Forum lays out the four scenarios based on demands (resource-intensive 
consumption vs. resource-effi  cient consumption) and markets (high connectivity and low con-
nectivity; see “Shaping the Future of Global Food Systems: A Scenarios Analysis” at www3.wefo-
rum.org/docs/IP/2016/NVA/WEF_FSA_FutureofGlobalFoodSystems.pdf). Th e fi rst scenario 


===PAGE 474===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
449
is “Unchecked Consumption” in which the demand toward Western-style diets (high in sugar, 
fat, salt, and animal-based foods) keeps increasing everywhere around the world. Business, gov-
ernment, and society keep making decisions in a “business-as-usual” manner. Th is is defi ned as 
deferring mitigating solutions to environmental degradation to the future, even though most of 
the environmental issues are irreversible by then.
Th e second scenario is “Open-Source Sustainability,” which is arguably the scenario that 
places the most number of people in relative advantage. Governments and businesses integrate 
the Sustainable Development Goals into their strategies. Food value chains become more trans-
parent, and consumers shift  toward a more resource-effi  cient food supply and demand.
Th e third scenario, “Survival of the Richest,” would be caused by public and private sectors 
acting on immediate concerns as opposed to long-term environment-friendly approaches and 
governments deciding to protect their countries. Th is scenario would result in increased malnu-
trition in all forms.
Th e last scenario discussed in the report is “Local Is the New Global.” Governments and 
businesses focus on sourcing locally and shift  toward meeting resource-effi  cient food supply and 
demand. Th ough this scenario would create positive impact for some geographies, others may 
suff er due to lack of arable land, resources, and technology.
As these possible example scenarios demonstrate, multiple stakeholders (public and private 
sectors, consumers, and growers) need to work toward a balance in which we can achieve a future 
global food system that is effi  cient, sustainable, inclusive, and nutritious.30
INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES AND COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES
Biofortifi cation to Address Micronutrient Defi ciencies
Micronutrient defi ciencies, discussed previously as hidden hunger, aff ect many people around 
the world. Low-income, rural families are particularly aff ected due to limited access to nutritious 
food. Low-income farming family diets may rely on staple crops that are accessible to them or that 
they grow, and these crops may not be nourishing enough, resulting in micronutrient defi cien-
cies. Th ere are several ways to address hidden hunger, such as fortifi cation of the foods or supple-
mentation. One complementary convention is biofortifi cation, which is enriching staple crops 
commonly consumed by the rural poor with vitamins and minerals. Th e goal is to make sure 
that these populations will have suffi  cient micronutrient levels to support the healthy growth and 
development of children to meet their full potential. And also so that adults can live healthy lives 
and contribute to the productivity and economic development of their countries. Th e founder 
of the HarvestPlus program Howarth Bouis shared the World Food Prize in 2016 with other 
pioneers for advancements in biofortifi cation technology. Th e HarvestPlus program is part of 
the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) Research Program on 
Agriculture for Nutrition and Health (A4NH). Th e CGIAR is a global agriculture research part-
nership with a vision for a food secure future. In partnership with multiple agricultural research 
centers and local partners, they provide global leadership on biofortifi cation.31
Biofortifi cation can be accomplished using three diff erent methods: plant breeding, transgenic 
techniques, and agronomic practices, that includes examples such as adding vitamins and min-
erals to fertilizers.31 To date, all the biofortifi ed crops released through the eff orts of HarvestPlus 
and its partners were developed using conventional plant breeding. By the end of 2018, more 
than 340 varieties of 11 biofortifi ed crops were offi  cially distributed in over 40 countries, with 
funding from HarvestPlus and its partners such as CGIAR’s International Potato Center (CIP). 


===PAGE 475===
450 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
HarvestPlus focuses on three essential micronutrients that are oft en lacking in diets, iron, zinc, 
and vitamin A in multiple staple crops, such as maize, beans, rice, pearl millet, sweet potato, sor-
ghum, and wheat.32 Th ere is evidence that biofortifi cation does not compromise yields, are more 
climate-smart and disease-resistant, and when consumed, biofortifi ed crops generate a signifi cant 
impact on consumers’ nutrition and health. Improved health outcomes such as improved cogni-
tive skills have been documented. Studies show that farmers are willing to grow, and consumers 
are eager to consume biofortifi ed products.31
Use of Big Data in Agriculture
Big data—the analysis of vast amounts of information from many sources—will continue to become 
an even more important part of agriculture. Common applications of big data in an agricultural 
context include remote monitoring of crops and fi eld conditions, and precise planting and fertiliza-
tion activities—also referred to as precision agriculture. Big data can also be used for monitoring 
and predicting weather phenomena that aff ect crops and informing farming and harvesting deci-
sions. Big data application can also help track agricultural production and sustainability practices 
and communicate that information to consumers. Th is would make it possible to “trace a head of 
lettuce back to the row of the fi eld from which it was harvested” and even “who was working on 
the crew that particular day.” One potential use of this information is better automated data collec-
tion to track progress against sustainability goals of consumer-facing companies like Walmart and 
Unilever. Better and more detailed product tracking can also be used for food safety verifi cation, 
and foodborne illness surveillance and response. A variety of scanning and screening technologies, 
alongside appropriately powerful analytic platforms, can be implemented toward this goal.33
Nanotechnology also has shown some potential in the form of nanoparticle-based biosensors 
to contribute to precision agriculture by detecting pollutants and pathogens, as well as monitoring 
growth and health of crops.34 However, it is important to note that uneven access to advanced 
agricultural technology has the potential to exacerbate food system disparities.30
Genetically Modifi ed Organisms (GMOs)
GMOs have been around for over 35 years. In agriculture, there have been many ambitions in 
embarking on this biotechnological journey of gene modifi cation. Even though improving the 
nutritional content and creating climate change resistance is generally mentioned, the existing 
genetically modifi ed crops confer three properties around insect damage, viral infections, and 
tolerance to herbicides. Th ere has been considerable controversy around the public acceptance 
around the safety of the GMOs. Furthermore, the proprietary rights imposed by the seed compa-
nies on the farmers have created additional challenges.35,36
Caution is urged as GMOs and other technologies to increase agricultural production are 
implemented more widely. Th e agrochemical boom that fueled the “green revolution” doubled 
agricultural productivity in the 20th century, but also created substantial negative eff ects that 
linger long aft er they were discovered and mitigation was attempted.19
FOOD POLICY HURDLES AND BARRIERS
Th e food system is complex, and policy interventions have many downstream consequences. 
Today, it is common for concurrent contradictory policies to be in place. For example, this 
includes eff orts in the European Union to increase localization of dairy production at the same 


===PAGE 476===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
451
time as relaxed quotas that incentivize global dairy competition, which inadvertently work against 
smaller local dairies.37
In the United States, the most signifi cant piece of legislation for both agriculture and food 
security is the Farm Bill. Th is is an omnibus legislation that is reauthorized by Congress every 
fi ve years—most recently in 2018—and that establishes spending of approximately $86 billion per 
year. Th e largest budget item is the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), formerly 
known as the food stamp program. More than 42 million low-income individuals receive SNAP 
benefi ts, which gives them a monthly budget to purchase food at stores and farmers’ markets. Th e 
rest of the Farm Bill addresses agricultural topics such as crop insurance and environmental con-
servation. Th e legislation is the subject of contentious debate and requires compromise to pass. 
Some argue that SNAP should be turned into its own separate piece of legislation, and this has 
been unsuccessfully attempted. Others argue for more provisions that tie agricultural and SNAP 
provisions together, such as initiatives to increase SNAP enrollee intake of and demand for fresh 
fruits and vegetables, which would also benefi t farmers.38
In recent years, in addition to helping people meet their caloric needs, as in the SNAP pro-
gram, there have been policy initiatives to limit the caloric intake, especially in the form of liquid 
calories. With the increasing rates of obesity, public health offi  cials and policy makers look for 
solutions to curb the problem, and decreasing sugar-sweetened beverage (SSB) consumption can 
be one of the solutions. Th ere have been multiple SSB taxes, also known as soda taxes, passed in 
diff erent localities and in diff erent countries. Th ere is more research to be done to optimize the 
amount of tax (e.g. how many cents, on what basis; ounce of soda vs. grams of sugar).39 However, 
research has demonstrated that soda taxes prove to be eff ective in reducing soda consumption.40 
Despite this evidence, the progress to implement soda taxes throughout the countries suff ering 
from the obesity epidemic has been slow. Obesity-related policies that target mainly the food 
industry have always been met with resistance, mainly due to the strong lobbying power of the 
global agricultural and food businesses.41
ACHIEVING FOOD EQUITY
Th e current global food system fails to distribute the food grown to malnourished people in equi-
table ways.42 One third of the food being grown is wasted or lost.17 We produce enough food to 
feed everyone in the world and yet one in nine people go hungry today. Th ere are numerous ineq-
uities in the current system, most notably on the basis of income level, race/ethnicity, and gen-
der. With the commodifi cation of food, low-income people have lost their ability to aff ord food. 
Ironically, a majority of the people dealing with chronic hunger are employed in agriculture.43
In the context of low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), about three out of four people 
in poverty live in rural areas, most of whom are working in agriculture. Th e majority of these 
farmers are undernourished as a result of their income level.42 Th e reasons for this situation are 
not singular and thus achieving food equity in this area will not be simple either. Access to food 
by the poor is shaped by a multitude of factors, such as land ownership, hourly wages, agricultural 
vulnerability, access to water, sanitation, storage, and processing technology to name a few.
High-income countries, despite having more food than their population needs, fail to provide 
equitable access to nutritious food. For example, in the United States, the food system operates 
through historically established structural inequalities based on a person or community’s race and 
ethnic background, and income.44 Th e Farm Bill, as discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Behavioral 
Aspects of Public Health Nutrition, is a signifi cant shaping mechanism for the food system in 


===PAGE 477===
452 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
the United States. Th e Haas Institute for a Fair and Inclusive Society defi nes structural racial-
ization as follows: “Th e set of practices, cultural norms, and institutional arrangements that are 
refl ective of, and help to create and maintain, racialized outcomes in society—reinforcing group 
based advantages and disadvantages.” Th e impact of racialized policies in the form of health and 
economic disparities is widely evident. For example, in every part of the food chain, from farm 
to fork, food laborers of color get paid less than their white counterparts. Neighborhoods with 
the least access to nutritious foods also house mostly racially marginalized populations.44 Th ough 
there are a lot of charity models trying to address the food and economic insecurities, they result 
in upholding the status quo, which drives these inequities in the fi rst place.44
Gender inequality is also a vital issue of concern in global food security and nutrition agenda. 
In developing countries, diff erential food allocation within a household is a key problem. Women 
or disabled members of vulnerable and low-income families do not get the most nutritious food 
available to the family.45
Women also tend to be disadvantaged in accessing/sharing resources, new technologies, and 
responsibilities within communities or households.46 Policies are needed to improve nutrition by 
increasing women’s assets, control over income and decision-making, and through empowerment 
to make decisions that will enhance family health and nutrition. It is vital to address gender (reduc-
ing gender disparities as a cross-cutting issue) in public health policies/strategies/programs.47
Investments in nutrition policies and programs also need to focus on adolescent girls, women 
of childbearing age, and pregnant and lactating women. Malnourished women give birth to mal-
nourished babies. Healthy generations can only be ensured by improving the quality and access 
to nutritious diets for all. It is crucial to support breastfeeding, provide safe food with adequate 
water and sanitation as well as education and knowledge and capacity-building in communities.48
Similarly, an increased number of studies highlight a direct link between malnutrition and 
disability,49,50 and there is a rising interest to understand the links between disability and malnu-
trition better. Disability-sensitive policies and programs can enhance nutrition and prevent or 
decrease disabilities and their impact.49
CONCLUSION
Th e current global food system does not ensure equitable access to nutritious food, and this cre-
ates a measurable and negative burden on individuals, communities, and society broadly. As a 
global society, we face multiple challenges such as increase in world population, loss of biodiver-
sity, environmental degradation, and climate change. Th ere are also many opportunities to move 
toward a thriving society by creating a sustainable food system that respects the environment and 
provides sovereignty to the communities around nutritious and culturally appropriate food. With 
the advancements of technology and communication around the globe, food-system stakeholders 
may choose to coordinate and collaborate toward a just food environment. Th ough the future by 
defi nition is unknown, we have the power to shape it.
KEY CONCEPTS
• Population growth, urbanization, and climate change will put increasing pressure on the 
food system.
• Future challenges include ensuring food security while also addressing disparities and 
equity issues.


===PAGE 478===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
453
• Technological advancements and policy levers off er tools to address challenges, but many 
are controversial, may not be evenly distributed, and can cause unintended consequences 
in the complex food system.
CASE STUDY 1: FOOD SOVEREIGNTY IN URBAN UNITED 
STATES: AN URBAN FARMING COMMUNITY IN SOUTH 
CENTRAL LOS ANGELES
Aft er the Los Angeles riots in 1992, a community garden in South Central Los Angeles was cre-
ated in a 14-acre vacant land as a Food Bank project to bring fresh fruits and vegetables into a 
food desert. Th is land was located in one of the most impoverished areas of Los Angeles, which 
was a neighborhood of majority people of color. Th roughout the years, the community garden 
turned into an urban farm, which housed 350 families who grew between 100 and 150 diff erent 
species of plants.51 Th e community of mostly Latinx immigrant farmers and African American 
residents came together to create a microcosm of food sovereignty. It all came to a halt when the 
real-estate developer who originally owned most of this vacant land came back to reclaim it in 
2003. Th e farming community did not want to leave the land they have been cultivating for all this 
time. Th is led to an epic battle, which involved the developer, farming families, local residents, 
and the city government. Ultimately, the developer won the lawsuit and evicted all the farmers in 
2006 despite numerous grassroots movements to preserve it. Th ough the developer was planning 
to build a warehouse, the lot remains idle and empty many years aft er being demolished. You can 
watch a documentary based on the South Central Farm, Th e Garden by Impact Partners.
Case Study Questions
 
■
When you get involved in an existing community garden or in planning a new one to 
increase fresh fruit and vegetable consumption, how can you best guide the commu-
nity you are serving from their land being demolished later on?
 
■
Is it possible to achieve food sovereignty, partially defi ned as people’s right to have con-
trol over how the food is grown and the food system operates, in a capitalistic society?
 
■
Have you come across any other examples of nonfood policies impacting people’s 
access to land and nutritious food, for example, zoning?
CASE STUDY 2: VITAMIN A SWEET POTATO IN UGANDA: 
BIOFORTIFICATION ENHANCING NUTRITION FOR 
VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
Sweet potato biofortifi ed with vitamin A is a prominent example of how the impact of biofortifi ca-
tion has been catalyzed over the years. Its success in enhancing nutrition for vulnerable rural pop-
ulations was recognized with the World Food Prize 2016. It has also been declared as one of the 
most innovative ways to feed the planet,52 and it was among the 25 best inventions of 2016 by Time 
Magazine. By the end of 2018, 145 varieties of vitamin A sweet potato were released in Africa, 
Asia, Latin America, and the Caribbean, facilitated by HarvestPlus and the International Potato 
Center. Biofortifi cation added varying farmer benefi ts to sweet potato. Th ese are high-yielding, 
virus-resistant, and drought-tolerant. In addition, biofortifi ed sweet potatoes provide up to 100% 
of daily vitamin A yields for the consumers. On the other hand, the global estimated prevalence 


===PAGE 479===
454 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
of vitamin A defi ciency in children under 5 years of age is 29%. Th e prevalence is almost 50% in 
sub-Saharan Africa.6 Consumption of vitamin A sweet potatoes with high beta carotene content 
is an eff ective way of addressing vitamin A defi ciency.
Ninety-fi ve percent of the sweet potato is grown in developing countries. It is an important sta-
ple food, specifi cally in sub-Saharan Africa and in Uganda. At the very beginning, implementers 
were concerned about the adoption of the vitamin A sweet potato by the population in Uganda, due 
to its orange color. Rural farmers were concerned about the biased knowledge that these products 
were genetically modifi ed, which was not the case. Th e reason behind this concern was the limited 
knowledge and awareness of traditional breeding technologies to produce biofortifi ed crops. Another 
prominent adoption concern was the changed cooking trait. Th e vitamin A sweet potato was soft er 
when cooked traditionally compared with the regular sweet potato. Providing nutrition education 
and access to the nutrition messages, communicating the behavior change in an effi  cient way, brand-
ing with the color “orange,” and raising awareness toward the benefi ts of biofortifi cation were key to 
attaining success in adoption and creating demand, as well as eliminating the potential bias.
HarvestPlus provided the necessary information and training to farmers on how to use the 
potato vines for the following seasons sustainably and on the nutritional benefi ts of the bioforti-
fi ed crop.53 Women were easier to convince since the mothers were able to observe the positive 
impact on their children’s health (such as reducing the incidence and duration of diarrhea).54 
Becoming aware of the biofortifi ed crops’ health impact was eff ective on several men, as well. 
However, men were also keen to have their sweet potato the way they were used to, with the same 
dry structure. At that point, it was important to focus on the cooking traits and let the consumers 
know that it takes less time to prepare the biofortifi ed sweet potato, which is a benefi t. Besides, 
if they steam it instead of boiling, which is more commonplace, they can still have the same pre-
ferred texture of the sweet potato meal.
It has also been crucial to have the ownership of national policy makers and other stakeholders 
such as the private sector to have vitamin A sweet potato highlighted in the national food sys-
tem and scaling up the nutrition and health impact.55 Product and market developments along 
the value chain were centralized among stakeholders’ eff orts, and private sector’s ownership was 
crucial in scaling up. Besides, years of eff ort led to Uganda’s inclusion of biofortifi cation in its pol-
icies and programs, with the support of the National Biofortifi cation Technical Working Group, 
established in 2019, consisting of public authorities, and other key stakeholders from the private 
sector, academia, multilateral institutions, and so on, to promote biofortifi cation in national pol-
icies, strategies, and programs.
Case Study Questions
 
■
What would be the best practices to drive the behavior change in a country with cul-
tural barriers? How might adoption be facilitated/enhanced within the community?
 
■
How should the government assess the impact of increased rates of adoption on public 
health?
 
■
Should the government relate the impact assessment with other indicators besides the 
nutrition outcomes? If so, which ones?
 
■
Who should be involved in deciding which scaling-up strategies should be in place and 
implement them?
 
■
Refl ection question: Imagine that a nutrition policy offi  cer who works for an interna-
tional organization wants to decide on an optimum way to make a right investment to 


===PAGE 480===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
455
overcome the iron defi ciency in a target rural population, whose diets rely on staple 
crops they grow in Rwanda. Th is population has limited access to nutritious diets and 
iron supplements, or food fortifi ed with iron is limited. What should be this nutrition-
ist’s strategy? Which signifi cant impact would this nutritionist’s investment bring?
SUGGESTED LEARNING ACTIVITIES
 
■
Explore these maps (www.impactlab.org/map) and choose a couple of locations to see 
how the climate change might play out in that area.
 
■
Learn about on-the-ground agroecology practices, saving seeds, and increasing biodi-
versity on the website www.navdanya.org/
 
■
Trade agreements, transnational corporations, and U.S. agricultural policy are behind 
the scenes shaping the food environment that you live in. Discover these at the Shahidi 
Project of University of Berkeley (shahidi.berkeley.edu).
REFLECTION QUESTIONS
 
■
Please read the four scenarios proposed by the World Economic Forum30 and discuss 
which one is more likely. Play out the scenarios in a neighborhood/area/region of your 
choosing, for example, your hometown, a community you are working with, or where 
you go to school.
 
■
We know that the food system is not racially just, but how would you go about measur-
ing the inequities? Check out these suggested metrics and discuss which one you might 
be able to use in some of the issues that you are passionate about: www.canr.msu.edu/
resources/measuring-racial-equity-in-the-food-system
CONTINUE YOUR LEARNING RESOURCES
USDA Farm Bill Implementation (www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2019/04/12/usda-update-farm-bill-
implementation-progress)
FAO Agriculture/ Nutrition update report websites (www.fao.org/publications/en/)
STAP (stapgef.org/publications)
GLOSSARY
Agroecology: Th ere is no single defi nition of agroecology. Th e Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) organized a database of diff erent defi nitions. For this chapter’s purposes, 
it is defi ned as “a more environmentally and socially sensitive approach to agriculture, one 
that focuses not only on production, but also on the ecological sustainability of the productive 
system. Th is defi nition implies a number of features about society and production that go well 
beyond the limits of the agricultural fi eld.”56
Biofortifi cation: Th is “is the process by which the nutritional quality of food crops is improved 
through agronomic practices, conventional plant breeding, or modern biotechnology. 
Biofortifi cation diff ers from conventional fortifi cation in that biofortifi cation aims to increase 
nutrient levels in crops during plant growth rather than through manual means during pro-
cessing of the crops.”57


===PAGE 481===
456 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
Conventional food systems: Th ese aim to maximize economies of scale, lowering overall con-
sumer costs and maximizing production. Conventional food systems generally utilize vertical 
integration, economic specialization, and global trade. Conventional food systems are based 
on the low cost of fossil fuels, the manufacturing of chemical fertilizers (also dependent on 
low-cost petroleum), the processing of food, and the packaging of food. Although conventional 
food systems oft en produce more food than alternative systems, they oft en do so by compro-
mising the ecosystem and the health of the consumer (Food System Wiki).
Th e EAT-Lancet commission report: 2019 summary report on the convening of 37 leading 
scientists from 16 countries across a variety of disciplines with the focus of developing global 
evidence-based objectives for the achievement of healthy diets and sustainable food production.
Global nutrition index: With the understanding that a single number would help rank coun-
tries based on the nutrition status, a global nutrition index was created modeled aft er the human 
development index. Th ree nutritional parameters are taken into account: nutritional defi cit, 
obesity, and food security. Nutritional defi cit is calculated through the data compiled by the 
Global Burden of Disease study. Obesity was measured via World Health Organization (WHO) 
country statistics. Food security was measured by the Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO) data on percentage undernourishment in a given country.58
Global syndemic: Th e Lancet Commission defi nes global syndemic as the coexistence of 
“three pandemics—obesity, undernutrition, and climate change. It aff ects most people in every 
country and region worldwide. Th ey constitute a syndemic, or synergy of epidemics, because 
they co-occur in time and place, interact with each other to produce complex sequelae, and 
share common underlying societal drivers.”11
HarvestPlus: Organization whose mission is the biofortifi cation of agricultural crops to reduce 
malnutrition around the world.
Hidden hunger: Th is also known as “micronutrient defi ciencies, occurs when the quality of 
food that people eat does not meet their nutrient requirements, so they are not getting the 
essential vitamins and minerals they need for their growth and development.”59 “A chronic lack 
of vitamins and minerals oft en has no visible warning signs so that people who suff er from it 
may not even be aware of it. Its consequences are nevertheless disastrous: hidden hunger can 
lead to mental impairment, poor health and productivity, or even death.”60
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC): Th e United Nations body for assessing 
the science related to climate change.
Lancet Global Burden of Disease report: 2017 report on one of the most comprehensive 
international observational epidemiological studies to date relative to mortality and morbidity 
due to chronic diseases, injuries, and other risk factors to health at local to global levels.
Lifeways: Th e customs and practices of a culture or society.
Local Is the New Global: Where governments and businesses focus on sourcing locally and 
shift  toward meeting resource-effi  cient food supply and demand.
Low- and middle-income countries (LMICs): Th ese encompass the countries categorized as 
low and middle income by the World Bank. According to this classifi cation, low-income coun-
tries have gross national income (GNI) of $1,025 or less and middle-income countries have 
GNI between $1,026 and $3,995.61
Noncommunicable diseases: A disease that cannot be transmitted from one person to another.


===PAGE 482===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
457
Nutrition transition: When diets shift  toward higher amounts of processes with lots of fat, 
salt, and sugar, bringing along related degenerative diseases, nutrition transition occurs. Th is 
term was coined by Barry Popkin in the 90s. Many factors, some of which are urbanization, 
increases in income, and roles both the food industry and the state play, concurrently result in 
nutrition transition.10
Open-Source Sustainability: Contemporary phrase to refer to a variety of questions related to 
the fi nancial support, burnout, and diversity within the open source community.
Precision agriculture: It “is the application of technologies and principles to manage spatial 
and temporal variability associated with all aspects of agricultural production for the purpose 
of improving crop performance and environmental quality.”62
Structural racialization: Th is is “the set of practices, cultural norms, and institutional arrange-
ments that are refl ective of, and help to create and maintain, racialized outcomes in society—
reinforcing group-based advantages and disadvantages.”44
Triple burden of malnutrition: Th ere are three types of malnutrition: undernutrition, micro-
nutrient defi ciencies, and overnutrition. Th e fact that all three can exist within the same 
country, family, and even the same person throughout the life span is called triple burden of 
malnutrition.
Ugly produce: In the conventional food system, only the cosmetically appealing and standard-
ized produce make it to the supermarket shelves. Th is means “ugly produce” that do not fi t the 
cosmetic standards of retailers get wasted. Starting in Europe, there were food waste reduction 
campaigns, which sold so-called ugly produce at bargain prices.18
World Economic Forum: An international organization headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland 
that meets on a yearly basis to discuss major issues concerning the world political economy.
REFERENCES
1. United Nations. World Population Prospects—Population Division—United Nations. 2019. https://
population.un.org/wpp/Publications
2. Th e State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World (SOFI). SOFI 2019—Th e State of Food Security 
and Nutrition in the World. 2019. http://www.fao.org/state-of-food-security-nutrition/en
3. World Health Organization. Global Hunger Continues to Rise, New UN Report Says. 2018. https://www.
who.int/news-room/detail/11-09-2018-global-hunger-continues-to-rise---new-un-report-says
4. Bailey RL, West KP, Black RE. Th e epidemiology of global micronutrient defi ciencies. Ann Nutr Metab. 
2015;66(suppl 2):22–33. doi:10.1159/000371618
5. Black RE, Victora CG, Walker SP, et al. Maternal and child undernutrition and overweight in low-income 
and middle-income countries. Lancet. 2013;382(9890):427–451. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60937-X
6. Stevens GA, Bennett JE, Hennocq Q, et al. Trends and mortality eff ects of vitamin A defi ciency in 
children in 138 low-income and middle-income countries between 1991 and 2013: a pooled 
analysis of population-based surveys. Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3(9):e528–e536. doi:10.1016/S2214-
109X(15)00039-X
7. Peng W, Berry EM. Global nutrition 1990–2015: a shrinking hungry, and expanding fat world. PLOS 
One. 2018;13(3):e0194821. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0194821
8. Food and Agriculture Organization. Th e State of Food and Agriculture 2013. Rome: Food and Agriculture 
Organization; 2013. http://www.fao.org/3/i3300e/i3300e00.htm
9. World Bank. Ending Poverty and Hunger by 2030: An Agenda for the Global Food System. Washington, 
DC: World Bank; 2015. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/21771
10. Popkin BM. Nutritional patterns and transitions. Popul Dev Rev. 1993;19(1):138–157. doi:10.2307/
2938388


===PAGE 483===
458 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
11. Swinburn BA, Kraak VI, Allender S, et al. Th e global syndemic of obesity, undernutrition, and climate 
change: the Lancet Commission report. Lancet. 2019;393(10173):791–846. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(18)32822-8
12. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Aff airs, Population Division. World Urbanization 
Prospects: Th e 2018 Revision (ST/ESA/SER.A/420). New York, NY: United Nations; 2019.
13. Afshin A, Sur PJ, Fay KA, et al. Health eff ects of dietary risks in 195 countries, 1990–2017: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Lancet. 2019;393(10184):1958–1972. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(19)30041-8
14. Willett W, Rockström J, Loken B, et al. Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT–Lancet Commission on 
healthy diets from sustainable food systems. Lancet. 2019;393(10170):447–492. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(18)31788-4
15. Food and Agriculture Organization. Th e future of food and agriculture – Alternative pathways to 2050. 
Rome; 2018:224.
16. IPES-Food. From Uniformity to Diversity: A Paradigm Shift  from Industrial Agriculture to Diversifi ed 
Agroecological Systems. Report by the International Panel of Experts on Sustainable Food Systems 
(IPES-Food). 2016. http://www.ipes-food.org/images/Reports/UniformityToDiversity_FullReport
.pdf
17. Food and Agriculture Organization. Global Food Losses and Food Waste—Extent, Causes and Prevention. 
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization; 2011.
18. Muth MK, Birney C, Cuéllar A, et al. A systems approach to assessing environmental and economic 
eff ects of food loss and waste interventions in the United States. Sci Total Environ. 2019;685:1240–1254. 
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.06.230
19. Carvalho FP. Pesticides, environment, and food safety. Food Energy Secur. 2017;6(2):48–60. doi:10.1002/
fes3.108
20. Sims R, Bierbaum R, Leonard S, Whaley C. A Future Food System for Healthy Human Beings and a 
Healthy Planet. Washington, DC: Scientifi c and Technical Advisory Panel to the Global Environment 
Facility; 2018.
21. d’Amour CB, Reitsma F, Baiocchi G, et al. Future urban land expansion and implications for global 
croplands. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017;114(34):8939–8944. doi:10.1073/pnas.1606036114
22. Mohareb E, Heller M, Novak P, et al. Considerations for reducing food system energy demand while 
scaling up urban agriculture. Environ Res Lett. 2017;12(12):125004. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa889b
23. Smith MR, Myers SS. Impact of anthropogenic CO2 emissions on global human nutrition. Nat Clim 
Change. 2018;8(9):834–839. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0253-3
24. Wheeler T, von Braun J. (2013). Climate change impacts on global food security. Science. 
2013;341(6145):508–513. doi:10.1126/science.1239402
25. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Summary for policymakers. In: Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai 
P, Pörtner HO, et al, eds. Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global 
Warming of 1.5°C Above Pre-Industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in 
the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Th reat of Climate Change, Sustainable Development, 
and Eff orts to Eradicate Poverty. Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization; 2018:32.
26. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. 
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fift h Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. In: Pachauri RK, Meyer LA, eds. Core Writing Team. Geneva, Switzerland; 
Author; 2014:151.
27. Fanzo J, Davis C, McLaren R, Choufani J. Th e eff ect of climate change across food systems: implications 
for nutrition outcomes. Glob Food Secur. 2018;18:12–19. doi:10.1016/j.gfs.2018.06.001
28. Food and Agriculture Organization. 3. Global and Regional Food Consumption Patterns and Trends. 
2015. http://www.fao.org/3/ac911e/ac911e05.htm
29. Burlingame B, Dernini S, eds. Sustainable Diets: Linking Nutrition and Food Systems. Wallingford, UK: 
CABI; 2018.
30. Nayyar S, Dreier L. Shaping the Future of Global Food Systems: A Scenarios Analysis. A report by the World 
Economic Forum’s System Initiative on Shaping the Future of Food Security and Agriculture Prepared 
in collaboration with Deloitte Consulting LLP. Geneva, Switzerland: World Economic Forum; 2017:28.


===PAGE 484===
 
17. Future Challenges, Trends, and Opportunities 
459
31. Bouis HE, Saltzman A. Improving nutrition through biofortifi cation: a review of evidence from 
HarvestPlus, 2003 through 2016. Glob Food Secur. 2017;12:49–58. doi:10.1016/j.gfs.2017.01.009
32. HarvestPlus. Catalyzing Biofortifi ed Food Systems, 2018 Annual Report. 2018. https://www.harvestplus.
org/knowledge-market/in-the-news/catalyzing-biofortifi ed-food-systems-2018-annual-report
33. Ahearn MC, Armbruster W, Young R. Big data’s potential to improve food supply chain environmental 
sustainability and food safety. Int Food Agribus Manag Rev. 2016;19(A):155–171.
34. Ranjan S, Dasgupta N, Lichtfouse E, eds. Nanoscience in Food and Agriculture. Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer Publishing; 2016.
35. Jones HD. Future-proofi ng regulation for rapidly changing biotechnologies. Transgenic Res. 
2019;28(2):107–110. doi:10.1007/s11248-019-00143-4
36. World Health Organization. Frequently Asked Questions on Genetically Modifi ed Foods. 2014. http://
www.who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/food-technology/faq-genetically-modifi  ed-food/en
37. Smith J, Lang T, Vorley B, Barling D. Addressing policy challenges for more sustainable local–global 
food chains: policy frameworks and possible food “futures.” Sustainability. 2016;8(4):299. doi:10.3390/
su8040299
38. Mozaff arian D, Griffi  n T, Mande J. Th e 2018 Farm Bill—Implications and Opportunities for Public 
Health. JAMA. 2019;321(9):835–836. doi:10.1001/jama.2019.0317
39. Benjamin BL, Taubinsky D. Should we tax soda? An overview of theory and evidence. J Econ Perspect. 
2019;33(3):202–227.
40. Park H, Yu S. Policy review: implication of tax on sugar-sweetened beverages for reducing obesity and 
improving heart health. Health Policy Tech. 2019;8(1):92–95. doi:10.1016/j.hlpt.2018.12.002
41. Nestle M. Food Politics: How the Food Industry Infl uences Nutrition and Health. Berkeley, CA; University 
of California Press; 2007.
42. Food and Agriculture Organization. Contribution to the 2014 United Nations Economic and Social Council 
(ECOSOC) Integration Segment. 2014. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/en/ecosoc/integration/pdf/
foodandagricultureorganization.pdf
43. Sharma P, Dwivedi S, Singh D. Global poverty, hunger, and malnutrition: a situational analysis. In: 
Singh U, Praharaj CS, Singh SS, Singh NP, eds. Biofortifi  cation of Food Crops. New York, NY: Springer 
Publishing; 2016:19–30. doi:10.1007/978-81-322-2716-8_2
44. Ayazi H, Esheikh E. Th e US Farm Bill: Corporate Power and Structural Racialization in the United States 
Food System. Haas Institute for a Fair and Inclusive Society at the University of California, Berkeley 
website; 2015. http://haasinstitute.berkeley.edu/farm-bill-report-corporate-power-and-structural
-racialization-us-food-system
45. Belinda D, Asiyati C. Gender and Food Insecurity in Southern African Cities. Southern African Migration 
Programme; 2016.
46. Townsend RF, Ceccacci I, Cooke S, et al. Implementing Agriculture for Development: World Bank Group 
Agriculture Action Plan (2013-2015). Washington, DC: Th e World Bank; 2013; No. 77911:1–132. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/331761468152719470/Implementing-agriculture-for-
development-World-Bank-Group-agriculture-action-plan-2013-2015
47. Diiro GM, Seymour G, Kassie M, et al. Women’s empowerment in agriculture and agricultural 
productivity: evidence from rural maize farmer households in western Kenya. PLoS ONE. 
2018;13(5):e0197995. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0197995
48. Branca F, Piwoz E, Schultink W, Sullivan LM. Nutrition and health in women, children, and adolescent 
girls. BMJ. 2015;351:h4173. doi:10.1136/bmj.h4173
49. Groce N, Challenger E, Berman-Bieler R, et al. Malnutrition and disability: unexplored opportunities 
for collaboration. Paediatr Int Child Health. 2014;34(4):308–314. doi:10.1179/2046905514Y.0000000156
50. Kerac M, Postels DG, Mallewa M, et al. Th e interaction of malnutrition and neurologic disability in 
Africa. Semin Pediatr Neurol. 2014;21:42–49. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1071909114000047
51. Peña D. Farmers Feeding Families: Agroecology in South Central Los Angeles, Keynote address 
presented to the National Association for Chicana and Chicano Studies, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA March 4, 2006. Retrieved from https://ucdenver.instructure.com/courses/344129/
fi les/4015468/download?wrap=1


===PAGE 485===
460 
IV. Current and Future Challenges in Public Health Nutrition and Sustainability
52. HarvestPlus. Orange Sweet Potato One of the Most Innovative Ways to Feed the Planet, Says USAID 
Administrator. HarvestPlus. 2013. https://www.harvestplus.org/node/1818
53. International Potato Center. Sweetpotato Facts and Figures. https://cipotato.org/crops/sweetpotato/
sweetpotato-facts-and-fi gures
54. Jones KM, de Brauw A. Using agriculture to improve child health: promoting orange sweet potatoes 
reduces diarrhea. World Dev. 2015;74:15–24. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.04.007
55. Tanumihardjo SA, Ball A-M, Kaliwile C, Pixley KV. Th e research and implementation continuum of 
biofortifi ed sweet potato and maize in Africa. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2017;1390(1):88–103. doi:10.1111/
nyas.13315
56. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Sustainable Agriculture: Defi nitions and Terms. Related Terms. 
Alternative Farming Systems Information Center. https://www.nal.usda.gov/afsic/sustainable-
agriculture-defi nitions-and-terms-related-terms#term1
57. World Health Organization. Biofortifi cation of Staple Crops. http://www.who.int/elena/titles/biofortifi 
cation/en
58. Rosenbloom JI, Kaluski DN, Berry EM. A global nutritional index. Food Nutr Bull. 2008;29(4):266–277. 
doi:10.1177/156482650802900403
59. Food and Agriculture Organization. What is hidden hunger? [Video] http://www.fao.org/about/
meetings/icn2/news-archive/news-detail/en/c/265240
60. United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe. Hidden Hunger—Missing Minerals. 
https://www.unric.org/en/latest-un-buzz/28946-hidden-hunger-hidden-problem
61. World Health Organization. Defi nition of regional groupings. https://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_
burden_disease/defi nition_regions/en/
62. Pierce FJ, Nowak P. Aspects of precision agriculture. In: Sparks DL, ed. Advances in Agronomy. Vol. 67. 
New York, NY: Academic Press. 1999:1–85. doi:10.1016/S0065-2113(08)60513-1


===PAGE 486===
APPENDIX: WEBSITES WITH 
EVIDENCE-INFORMED PROGRAMS 
TO IMPROVE DIET AND EXERCISE 
BEHAVIORS OF COMMUNITIES
KAREN L. PROBERT AND BECKY ADAMS
COMPREHENSIVE WEBSITES WITH EVIDENCE-BASED PROGRAMS 
PLUS ADVANCED SUPPORT RESOURCES
Title: CDC Community Health Improvement Navigator
Sponsor: U. S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC)
Description: Th e CDC Community Health Improvement Navigator (CHI Navigator) Database of 
Interventions is a tool that helps you identify interventions that work in four action areas—socio-
economic factors, physical environment, health behaviors, and clinical care. Th e CHI Navigator 
is a one-stop-shop of program planning resources including the database of evidence-informed 
programs. A key goal of the website is to support hospitals in improving community health as 
a hospital shift s from a focus on volume of services to an orientation toward improved health 
outcomes of communities served. (Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC 
Community Health Improvement Navigator website. 2019. www.cdc.gov/chinav)
Title: What Works for Health
Sponsor: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
Description: “A menu of evidence-informed policies and programs that can make a diff erence 
locally.” Another full-service website for evidence-informed program planning. Th e What 
Works for Health program database is one component of the County Health Rankings & 
Roadmaps website that also includes information and resources on assessment, prioritization, 
evaluation, and collaboration. (Source: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. What Works for 
Health website. 2019. https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/take-action-to-improve-health/
what-works-for-health)


===PAGE 487===
462 
Appendix
WEBSITES GEARED TOWARD SPECIFIC FEDERAL FUNDING STREAMS
Title: DNPAO Proven Strategies
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity
Description: On this website, CDC lists “proven strategies that support healthy eating, physical 
activity, and breastfeeding in child care, health care, school, worksite, and community-wide set-
tings.” (Source: Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity. Division of Nutrition, Physical 
Activity, and Obesity, Proven Strategies website. 2019. https://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpao/proven
-strategies.html)
Title: MCH Evidence
Sponsor: National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health with funding from U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration
Description: Th e evidence-informed program database is one component of the website. Th e 
MCH Evidence website is a comprehensive approach to advance Title V, Maternal and Child 
Health (MCH) Block Grant state plans. Th e website incorporates the expertise of four MCH-
focused organizations and includes an intervention database and innovative technical assistance. 
Interventions are pulled from Innovation Station, a searchable database of emerging, promising, 
and best practices in MCH developed by the Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs. 
(Source: National Center for Education in Maternal and Child Health. MCH Evidence website. 
2019. https://www.mchevidence.org)
Title: Research-Tested Intervention Programs (RTIPs)
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Cancer Institute
Description: “RTIPs is a searchable database of evidence-based cancer control interventions and 
program materials and is designed to provide program planners and public health practitioners 
easy and immediate access to research-tested materials.” (Source: National Cancer Institute. 
Research-Tested Interventions Programs website. 2019. rtips.cancer.gov/rtips)
Title: SNAP-Ed Toolkit
Sponsor: Regional Nutrition Education Centers of Excellence, National Coordination Center at 
the University of Kentucky with funding from U.S. Department of Agriculture
Description: A collection of evidence-based* obesity prevention and policy, system, and environ-
mental change interventions. Th e interventions in the toolkit are only a partial list of interven-
tions that are used in SNAP-Ed. All the interventions are intended to achieve the goal of helping 
SNAP-eligible households make healthy eating and physical activity choices on a limited budget. 
(Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture. SNAP-Ed Toolkit website. 2019. https://wicworks.fns.
usda.gov)
*Term used on SNAP-Ed Toolkit website but not all interventions meet the strict definition of evi-
dence-based as per the typology for classifying interventions by level of scientific evidence.


===PAGE 488===
 
Appendix 
463
Title: WIC Works Resource System
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
Description: “Th e WIC Works Resource System (WIC Works) is an online education, training and 
resource center for state, local and clinic staff  administering the Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC).” WIC Works is “the primary means to share 
FNS resources as well as resources from a variety of program partners, including WIC state and 
local agencies, WIC clinics, other federal agencies, and non-government entities that off er WIC-
relevant resources.” (Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture. WIC Works Resource System website. 
2019. https://wicworks.fns.usda.gov)
WEBSITES WITH EVIDENCE-BASED ONLY PROGRAMS
Title: Healthy People 2020 Evidence-Based Resources
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Offi  ce of Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion
Description: Database with evidence-based resources selected by subject matter experts. 
Resources must have evidence of eff ectiveness, feasibility, reach, sustainability, and transferabil-
ity. Each resource has been rated and classifi ed according to specifi c criteria. (Source: Offi  ce of 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020 Evidence-Based Resources. 2019. 
https://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/tools-resources/Evidence-Based-Resources)
Title: Th e Community Guide
Sponsor: Community Preventive Services Task Force
Description: A resource to help practitioners select interventions that improve health and pre-
vent disease. Th e guide to Community Preventive Services (Th e Community Guide) includes 
evidence-based programs that consider health outcomes and cost eff ectiveness. Findings are 
describes as recommended with strong evidence or suffi  cient evidence, recommended against 
or insuffi  cient evidence. Th e fi ndings are based on systematic reviews of peer-reviewed litera-
ture. (Source: Community Preventive Services Task Force. Th e Community Guide. https://www
.thecommunityguide.org)
WEBSITES WITH PROGRAMS BUT FUNDING STOPPED
For the three resources listed in this section, a website exists but funding to support continued 
maintenance has stopped.
Title: AHRQ Innovations Exchange
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality (AHRQ)
Description: Th e Innovations Exchange includes clinical and nonclinical activities and tools that 
vary in their degree of novelty, eff ect on quality, and level of supporting evidence. Funding ended 
September 2016 and nothing has been added since. Other current websites pull information from 


===PAGE 489===
464 
Appendix
the database on this website. (Source: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. AHRQ Health 
Care Innovations Exchange website. 2019. https://innovations.ahrq.gov)
Title: Center TRT
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity
Description: “Th e Interventions section of the website provides resources designed to support 
the planning, implementation, and evaluation of evidence-supported nutrition, physical activity 
and obesity prevention interventions.” (Source: UNC Center for Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention. Overview. http://centertrt.org/?p=interventions_overview)
Title: Community Health Online Resource Center
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Description: A searchable database “populated with practice-based resources to help you imple-
ment changes to prevent disease and promote healthy living in your community. Th e resources 
include webinars, model policies, toolkits, guides, fact sheets, and other practical materials which 
are organized by content areas.” Most recent entries in the database were in 2017. (Source: Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention. Community Health Online Resource Center. 2019. https://
www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dch/online-resource/index.htm)
WEBSITES LISTING RESOURCES FROM MULTIPLE SOURCES
Title: Collection of Online Resources & Inventory Database: Organized and Readily Accessible 
(CORIDOR)
Sponsor: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
Description: Th e resources included on this website “are primarily practice-based and represent 
science and practice promoted by CDC and CDC-funded partners to address chronic disease 
conditions and risk factors. Tools include model policies and programs, guides, case studies, tool-
kits, and other resources for a variety of audiences with a range of skills.” (Source: Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. CORIDOR. 2019. https://nccd.cdc.gov/CORIDOR)
Title: Rural Health Information Hub
Sponsor: Federal Offi  ce of Rural Health Policy
Description: Th is website includes evidence-based toolkits for rural community health. “Th e step-
by-step guides help practitioners build eff ective programs. Resources and examples are drawn 
from evidence-informed and promising programs.” For some of the websites listed in this section, 
the Rural Health Information Hub includes the strengths and limitations from the rural perspec-
tive. Source: Rural Health Information Hub. Rural Health Information Hub website. 2019. https://
www.ruralhealthinfo.org)


===PAGE 490===
INDEX
AAFCS. See American Association of Family and 
Consumer Sciences
ABCD. See Asset-Based Community Development
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND), 387, 
397
Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition 
and Dietetics (ACEND), 388
acculturation, 239–240
ACEND. See Accreditation Council for Education 
in Nutrition and Dietetics
ACHI. See Association for Community Health 
Improvement
activities of daily living (ADLs), 360
acute respiratory infections, 347
ADLs. See activities of daily living
adolescent nutrition, 354
advocacy, 149
Agatston Urban Nutrition Initiative (AUNI), 221
AGPPHN. See Association of Graduate Programs 
in Public Health Nutrition
agroecological systems, 423–425
agroecology, 446, 448
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) 
National Laboratory Center test, 91
aliens, 238
American Association of Family and Consumer 
Sciences (AAFCS), 397
American Public Health Association (APHA), 397
AND. See Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
anemia, 351, 444
anorexia, 356
aging, 359
anxiety, 356
APHA. See American Public Health Association
ASNNA. See Association of SNAP Nutrition 
Edcation Administrators
ASPHN. See Association of State Public Health 
Nutritionists
Asset-Based Community Development (ABCD), 
146
Association for Community Health Improvement 
(ACHI), 265
Association of Graduate Programs in Public 
Health Nutrition (AGPPHN), 4, 397
Association of SNAP Nutrition Edcation 
Administrators (ASNNA), 138
Association of State Public Health Nutritionists 
(ASPHN), 4, 398
asylum seekers, 238
audience segmentation, Social Marketing Th eory, 
82
AUNI. See Agatston Urban Nutrition Initiative
austerity, 421
Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative, 102
behavior theories, 69–70
Diff usion of Innovation Th eory, 79
Health Action Process Approach, 77–78
Health Belief Model, 72–73
individual qualities, 70–71
Policy, Systems, and Environmental Change 
Approach, 78
rural and urban setting, 80–82
Social Cognitive Th eory, 73–74
Social-Ecological Model, 78
social-ecological models, 71
Stages of Change, 75–77
Th eory of Reasoned Action, 74–76
behavioral aspects
behavior theories (see behavior theories)
behavioral economics, 80
client care plans and staff  morale, 83
environment, 70
health and wellness programs, 83–84
personal characteristics, 70
social determinants of change and health, 69, 70
behavioral economics, 80
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 
(BRFSS), 277, 324
big data application, agriculture, 450
Bill Emerson Good Samaritan Act, 369
binge eating disorder, 356
biofortifi cation, 449–450, 453–454
biomarkers, 53


===PAGE 491===
466 
Index
Blue Zones Project in rural Minnesota, 140
BMI. See body mass index
body mass index (BMI), 349
Bradford Hill’s criteria for causality, 45
BRFSS. See Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance 
System
Brofenbrenner’s ecological framework, 71
Built Environment Assessment Tool, 267
bulimia, 356
Burmese refugees, 246–247
CACFP. See Child and Adult Care Food Program
Canadian Health Services Research Foundation, 
55
cancer, 351
carbon regulation, 417
cardiovascular disease, 350
case–control studies, 35–36
CASP. See Critical Appraisal Skills Program
CATCH program. See Coordinated Approach to 
Child Health program
causal pathway, 30, 31
cause–eff ect hypotheses, 34
CBPR. See community-based participatory 
research
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention
CDFIs. See Community Development Financial 
Institutions
Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion 
(CNPP), 220
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), 5, 23, 44, 90
certifi cation, 386
CGIAR Research Program. See Consultative 
Group for International Agricultural 
Research Research Program
CHA. See community health assessment
CHANGE model. See Community Health 
Assessment and Group Evaluation model
CHC. See community health center
Child and Adult Care Food Program (CACFP), 92, 
136, 370
child nutrition, 353
Child Nutrition Act, 97
childhood obesity prevention
community-based, 121–122
global, 120–121
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), 186
CHIP. See Children’s Health Insurance Program
CHNA. See community health needs assessment
cholera death, John Snow’s disease outbreak map, 
28
CHWs. See community health workers
circular and solidarity economy, 424
CIs. See confi dence intervals
climate change, 447
clinical epidemiology, 26, 49–50
clinical trials, 36
CNPP. See Center for Nutrition Policy and 
Promotion
coalitions, 146–147
cocreation, 423
Cognitive Processes of Change, 77
cognitive response testing, 333
cohort studies, 61
advantages, 32–33
disadvantages, 33
prospective cohort studies, 34–35
retrospective cohort study, 33–34
collaboration, 400
collaborative grantsmanship, 152
college and university health trends
disordered eating, 356
fi nancial hardship, 357
food and nutrition insecurity, 357–358
lifestyle factors, 356–357
obesity epidemic, 356
psychological problems, 356
transitional period, 354, 356
Commission on Social Determinants of Health 
(CSDH), 203, 204
Commodity Supplemental Food Program (CSFP), 
93, 370
community action plan, 301
community assessment
defi nition, 260
terminology, 260
community assets, 168
community coalitions, 147–148
community development, 146
Community Development Financial Institutions 
(CDFIs), 211
community engagement, 145–146, 259
Community Engagement Project of McDowell 
County, 153–154
community food environment, 99–100
community gardens, 199
citizen participation, 214
defi nition, 213
and sustainable development, 213–214
community governance, 420
Community Guide, 296
community health assessment (CHA)
Built Environment Assessment Tool, 267
challenges, 267–268
CHANGE model, 263–265
collaboration, 270
community environment, 266
Community Tool Box, 265


===PAGE 492===
 
Index 
467
defi nition, 260
food environment, 267
goals and objective, 287–289
justifi cation, 261
McCrory Local Foods, 278–279
Mobilizing for Action Th rough Planning and 
Partnership, 263, 264
Nutrition and Physical Activity Program 
Planning, 265
nutrition environment, 267
opinion and perception information, 266
population data, 266
primary data, 265
public health professional skills, 269–270
public policy environment, 266
results, 286–287
secondary data, 265
social media and innovative technologies, 
272–274
stakeholder relationships and engagement, 
270–272
target population, 269
toolkit, 265
Woodruff  County, 276–278
Community Health Assessment and Group 
Evaluation (CHANGE) model, 263–265, 299
community health center (CHC), 261
community health improvement planning 
template, 300
community health needs assessment (CHNA), 260
Community Health Worker Model, 231
community health workers (CHWs), 244–245
community strengths, 168
Community Tool Box, 265
Community Tool Box Action Plan Template, 301, 
302
community-based obesity prevention 
interventions
Australia, 122
Ecological Systems Th eory, 121
environmental and nutrition interventions, 121
food environment, 121
France, 121–122
holistic approaches, 121
community-based participatory research (CBPR), 
272
community-supported agriculture (CSA), 139, 369
competence, 385
concept testing, 333
confi dence intervals (CIs), 30
confounder, 30
confounding, 30–31
Consultative Group for International Agricultural 
Research (CGIAR) Research Program, 449
consumer food environment, 99
evaluation studies, 102
healthy food environments, 101
menu labeling in restaurants, 101
policy change and school food environment, 
101
poor food environments and health disparities, 
101–102
SNAP retailer rule, 100
sugar-sweetened beverage taxes, 100
WIC food package policy, 100
Context of Change, 77
continuing professional education (CPE), 386
convenience stores, 175
conventional food system, 446
convergent parallel design, 60
Coordinated Approach to Child Health (CATCH) 
program, 138
core competency, 388
core-based statistical areas, 165
CPE. See continuing professional education
credentialing, 386
Critical Appraisal Skills Program (CASP), 60
Crop Improvement Program, 436–437
crop yield, 447
cross-sectional studies, 32
crowdsourcing, 273
CSA. See community-supported agriculture
CSDH. See Commission on Social Determinants 
of Health
CSFP. See Commodity Supplemental Food 
Program
cues to action, 72
cultural awareness, 180
cultural competence, 179–180, 245
cultural competency, 152
cultural humility, 245
culture and foodways
class structures, 115
context, 117
culturally appropriate programs and 
interventions, 119–120
food and medicine, 118–119
food vs. nonfood, 118
global childhood obesity prevention, 120–121
sacred vs. profane foods, 118
social foods, 119
vignette, 116–117
customer orientation, Social Marketing Th eory, 82
DAG. See directed acyclic graph
declarative knowledge, 73
dementia, 362
Department of Commerce (DOC), 90–91
Department of the Treasury, 91
Department of Transportation (DOT), 91


===PAGE 493===
468 
Index
depression, 356
diabetes, 361
diarrheal diseases, 347
dietary assessment methods in epidemiological 
studies, 54
Diff usion of Innovation Th eory (DIT), 79, 152
directed acyclic graph (DAG), 31
disease, 23
disease registries, 49–50
disordered eating, 356
DIT. See Diff usion of Innovation Th eory
diversity, 423
DMSA. See Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition
DOC. See Department of Commerce
documentation, 395
DOT. See Department of Transportation
Double Up Food Bucks Program (DUFB), 80
Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition (DMSA), 387, 
389–390
dual relationships, 177, 178
DUFB. See Double Up Food Bucks Program
earthworms, 415
EAT-Lancet commission report, 445
EBM. See evidence-based medicine
EBP. See evidence-based practice
EBPH. See evidence-based public health
ecological economics, 419–420
Ecological Systems Th eory (EST), 121
eff ect modifi cation, 31
eff ective program, 293
EFNEP. See Expanded Food and Nutrition 
Education Program
Egan, Mary, 3
EIDM. See evidence-informed decision-making
EJSCREEN. See Environmental Justice Screening 
and Mapping Tool
eLENA. See e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition 
Actions
e-Library of Evidence for Nutrition Actions 
(eLENA), 243
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act 
(EMTALA), 169
emerging programs, 294
EMTALA. See Emergency Medical Treatment and 
Labor Act
energy, 417–418
English disease, 27
Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of 
health Research (EQUATOR) Network, 60
Ensemble, Prevenons l’Obesite Des Enfants 
(EPODE), 119–120, 123–125
Environmental Justice Screening and Mapping 
Tool (EJSCREEN), 278
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 90, 419
environmental scanning, 260
EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency
epidemiologist, 289
epidemiology. See also nutritional epidemiology 
research
biostatistical principles, 27–31
case study, 38–39
case–control studies, 35–36
clinical epidemiology, 26
cohort studies, 32–35
confi dence intervals, 30
confounding, 30–31
cross-sectional studies, 32
data, 37–38
data organization, 28–30
experimental studies, 36–37
history, 27
observational, 26
population choices and behaviors, 26
a priori hypothesis, 26
risk ratio, 29
EPODE. See Ensemble, Prevenons l’Obesite Des 
Enfants
equality, 420–421
EQUATOR Network. See Enhancing the QUAlity 
and Transparency Of health Research 
Network
equity, 24–25
EST. See Ecological Systems Th eory
evidence-based medicine (EBM), 51, 292
classic EBP confi guration, 55, 56
decision-making and evidence uncertainty, 55, 
56
evidence, 53, 55
hierarchy of evidence, 57–59
randomized controlled trial, 53
Renaissance Movement, 55–57
evidence-based practice (EBP), 51
evidence-based programs, 50–51
best practice, 294
evidence-based practice model, 292, 293
evidence-based public health, 291–292
evidence-informed programs, 292–305
terminology, 291
websites, 461
worksite nutrition and physical activity 
program, 290
evidence-based public health (EBPH)
characteristics, 292
defi nition, 291, 292
evidence-based medicine, 292
evidence-informed decision-making (EIDM), 298
evidence-informed programs
cancer prevention program, 296
categories, 293–294


===PAGE 494===
 
Index 
469
emerging program, 294
evidence-informed decision-making, 298
interventions, 296
public health program, 293
value, 294
website traits, 295–297
Exchange Th eory, 81
Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program 
(EFNEP), 137
experimental studies, 36–37
explanatory sequential design, 60
exploratory sequential design, 60
exposure, 23
externalized costs, 419
extractivism, 434
fair trade agreement, 439
faith-based initiatives, 147
FARA. See Food Access Research Atlas
farm bill
5-year reauthorization, 96–97
crop insurance program, 95–96
farm commodity crop program, 94
goals, 94
law, 95, 96
reauthorization process, 93
titles, 94–95
Farm to Preschool program, 302
Farmers’ Market Audit Tool, 99
Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program (FMNP), 92
farmers’ markets, 139
farm-to-cafeteria initiatives, 139
FDA. See Food and Drug Administration
FDPIR. See Food Distribution Program on Indian 
Reservations
federal food assistance programs, 370
federal funding streams, 462–463
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 91
Federally Qualifi ed Health Centers (FQHCs), 177, 
178
FFA. See Food for All
FFQ. See Food Frequency Questionnaire
FIMI. See Food Insecurity Multidimensional Index
fi nancial health, 360
fi rst 1,000 days of life, 234–235
fi ve-Cs model of food and family, 208
FMNP. See Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program
focus groups, 323
food access, 365
food access disparities, 141–143
Food Access Research Atlas (FARA), 155
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the 
United Nations, 98
Food and Drug Act, 3
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 90
Food and Physical Activity Decisions Social-
Ecological Model, 71
food availability, 365
food deserts, 81, 141, 175, 199, 201–202
Food Distribution Program on Indian 
Reservations (FDPIR), 93
food environment, 267
food equity, 451–452
Food for All (FFA), 185–186
Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ), 52, 62–63
food insecurity, 143–144, 344
chronic stress, 234
clean water access, 235–236
coping strategies, 365
FAO report, 233
fi nancial and emotional pressure, 366
fi rst 1,000 days of life, 234–235
food availability, 235
Food Insecurity Multidimensional Index, 
367–371
food insecurity–obesity paradox, 234
life-course approach or perspective, 234
low-income households, 366
overweight and obesity, 235
physical activity resources, 366
Social-Ecological Model, 367–371
in United States, 234–235
Food Insecurity Multidimensional Index (FIMI), 
367–371
food insecurity–obesity paradox, 234
food loss and waste, 446
food policy and public health
Child Nutrition Act, 97
community food assessments, 103
community food environment, 99–100, 102
consumer food environment, 100–103
farm bill, 93–97
farmers’ markets, 104
federal agencies and organizations, 90–93
food environment, 98–99
food policy councils, 103
fruit and vegetable production and 
consumption, 104
global health and agricultural organizations, 98
U.S. agricultural trade, 97–98
food security, 106, 233
defi nition, 142
food sovereignty, 144–145
framework, 364–365
future aspects, 144
and health, 365–366
malnourishment, 143
racial/ethnic inequity, 144
rural health, 174–176
status measurements, 366–367


===PAGE 495===
470 
Index
food sovereignty, 144–145, 419, 453
Food Stamp Program, 11
food swamps, 141, 202
food systems, 364
advocacy, 149
agrochemicals, 446–447
agroecology, 448
climate change, 447–448
community development, 146
community engagement, 145–146
community’s built environment, 141
conventional food system, 446
faith-based initiatives, 147
food loss and waste, 446
food security, 142–144
future food-system scenarios, 448–449
global food system, 445–446
health disparities, 141–143
increased uban farming, 447
local food system, 140–141
nontraditional partners, 141
systems thinking, 141
Food Tank, 220–221
food utilization, 365
food waste, 368
Food-EPI. See Healthy Food Environment Policy 
Index
foodways, 115
forensic epidemiology, 27, 46–49
formative evaluation, 320
formative research, 82
fossil fuels, 418
FQHCs. See Federally Qualifi ed Health Centers
Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program, 93
freshwater depletion, 415
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission
full-service grocery stores, 169
Gantt chart, 402, 403
GDP. See gross domestic product
gender inequality, 243, 452
genetically modifi ed organisms (GMOs), 450
gentrifi cation, 201
Girinka program, 436–437
Global Childhood Obesity Prevention program, 
120–121
global health trends
chronic hunger, 443–444
food loss and waste, 446
food policy hurdles and barriers, 450–451
hunger and overnutrition, 444
micronutrient defi ciencies, 444
noncommunicable diseases, 444–445
global nutrition security and insecurity
Burmese refugees, 246–247
community health workers, 244–245
cultural competence, 245
education and literacy, 241
educational materials and assessments, 243–244
food deprivation experiences, 242–243
food insecurity, 233–237
gender inequality, 243
interprofessional collaboration, 244
malnutrition, 232–233
mental and physical health, 242
pre- and postmigration factors, 240
prior job training and skills, 241
U.S. migration–immigration, 237–240
validated resources, 243
global PHN practice, 6, 7
globalization, 419
GMOs. See genetically modifi ed organisms
GNI. See gross national income
grass-based farms, 415
grassroots coalitions, 147
Green space, 139
gross domestic product (GDP), 418
gross national income (GNI), 228
HarvestPlus program, 449–450
HBM. See Health Belief Model
HDI. See Human Development Index
health, 23
Health Action Process Approach, 77–78
Health Belief Model (HBM), 70, 72–73
health communication strategies
cognitive response testing, 333
concept testing, 333
data collection, 334
intercept surveys, 333
interpersonal channels, 332
mass media, 332
messages and materials, 333
outcome evaluation, 334
planning and strategy development, 332–333
print materials, 332
process evaluation, 333
social media, 334
telehealth strategies, 332, 334
Health Corner Store Initiative, 213
health disparities, 141–142
health equity, 69, 142
health inequities, 25
health literacy, 152
Health Professional Shortage Areas (HPSAs), 170
health professionals, rural settings
distinctives, 177–179
dual relationships, 177, 178
fi nancial incentives, 176
nutrition practice settings, 177, 178


===PAGE 496===
 
Index 
471
positive aspects, 176
quality-of-life advantages, 176
recruiting practices, 176–177
Health Star Rating system, 117
health status disparities, 170
Healthy Corner Store Initiative, 142
healthy diet, 200–201
Healthy Food Environment Policy Index (Food-
EPI), 103
Healthy Food Environments (HFE) pricing 
initiative, 327–331
Healthy Food Financing Initiative (HFFI), 99, 212
Healthy Food Zoning, 211
Healthy Hunger Free Kids Act, 97, 101, 332
Healthy Kids, Healthy Communities (HKHC) 
national program, 216
Healthy Kindergarten Initiative, 139
Healthy Living Toolkit, 243
Healthy People, 5
Healthy People Initiative, 289
hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) outbreak, 
47–49
HFFI. See Healthy Food Financing Initiative
HHI Coalition. See Howard County Hometown 
Health Improvement Coalition
hidden hunger, 444
HIV infection, 347
House of Representatives, 95
Howard County Hometown Health Improvement 
(HHI) Coalition, 307–311
HPSAs. See Health Professional Shortage Areas
Human Development Index (HDI), 228–229
humoral fl uids, 118–119
Hunger and Health Coalition of Boone, 148
IADLs. See instrumental activities of daily living
ICESCR. See International Covenant on 
Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights
IDD. See iodine defi ciency disorder
IDPs. See internally displaced peoples
Imagine Central Arkansas, 272–273
immigrant paradox, 239
immigrants, 238, 239
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), 237
impact evaluation, 321
implementation research, 320
INA. See Immigration and Nationality Act
individuality, 415
individual-level strategies, Social-Ecological 
Model, 322
innovative technologies and communication 
strategies
big data application, agriculture, 450
biofortifi cation, 449–450
genetically modifi ed organisms, 450
Institute of Medicine (IOM), 5
instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), 360
intercept surveys, 333
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), 447
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), 
417
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 265
internally displaced peoples (IDPs), 238
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and 
Cultural Rights (ICESCR), 422
International Obesity Task Force (IOTF), 121
International Rescue Committee (IRC), 231
International Society of Behavioral Nutrition and 
Physical Activity (ISBNPA), 398
interpersonal channels, 332
interrelated sustainability crises
agroecological systems, 423–425
carbon regulation, 417
economics, 418–420
energy, 417–418
environment, 414–417
equality, 420–421
externalized costs, 419
freshwater depletion, 415
market failure correction, 421–422
monocropping, 417
nitrogen fi xation, 416
phosphorus depletion, 416
rights of nature, 422–423
topsoil loss, 414–415
intervention and evaluation strategies, 319–320. 
See also program evaluation
interviewer-administered (direct measure) 
nutrition assessments, 52
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), 351
iodine defi ciency disorder (IDD), 345, 352
IOTF. See International Obesity Task Force
IPBES. See Intergovernmental Science-Policy 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
Services
IPCC. See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change
IRS. See Internal Revenue Service
IUGR. See intrauterine growth restriction
John Snow’s cholera outbreak investigation, 46–47
Lancet Global Burden of Disease report, 445
language line, 244
LEAD. See Locate the evidence, Evaluate the 
evidence, Assemble the evidence, and inform 
Decisions
leadership development, 396


===PAGE 497===
472 
Index
life-course approach, 246
lifeways, 443
literacy, 241
livestock production, 448
LiveWell Greenville Aft erschool Initiative, 218
LMICs. See low- and middle-income countries
local food system, 140–141
Locate the evidence, Evaluate the evidence, 
Assemble the evidence, and inform Decisions 
(LEAD), 121
logic models, 321
long-term intake assessments, 52
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), 451
low food security, 106
macronutrients, 232, 344
malaria, 347
malnutrition, 232–233
adolescent nutrition, 354
case study, 372–375
child nutrition, 353
college and university health trends, 356–358
drug addiction and substance abuse, 352–353
food and nutrition needs, 344, 345
Food Insecurity Multidimensional Index, 
367–371
food security framework, 364–367
intervention coverage trends, 354, 355
maternal and child health trends, 351–352
maternal nutrition, 354
older adult nutrition needs, 359–364
overnutrition, 348–351
undernutrition, 344–348
MAP-IT. See Matrix Assisting Practitioner’s 
Intervention Planning Tool
MAPP. See Mobilizing for Action Th rough 
Planning and Partnership
marginal food security, 106
marketing mix, Social Marketing Th eory, 82
mass media, 332
Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Block Grant 
Program, 261
maternal nutrition, 354
Matrix Assisting Practitioner’s Intervention 
Planning Tool (MAP-IT), 301–302
Meals on Wheels program, 363
measles, 347
mentorship, 396
metropolitan counties, 165
mHEALTH applications, 334–335
miasma theory, 27
microloans, 232
micronutrient defi ciency
biofortifi cation, 449–450
childhood, 351–352
micronutrients, 232, 344
mixed methods research, 60
mobile food markets, 16
Mobilizing for Action Th rough Planning and 
Partnership (MAPP), 263, 264, 299
modern public health system, 4
modifi ed Retail Food Environment Index 
(mRFEI), 101
monocropping, 417
Moving to the Future: Developing Community-
Based Nutrition Services, 5
mRFEI. See modifi ed Retail Food Environment 
Index
NANA. See National Alliance for Nutrition and 
Activity
nanotechnology, 450
NAS. See neonatal abstinence syndrome
National Alliance for Nutrition and Activity 
(NANA), 220
National Center for Cultural Competence 
(NCCC), 179
National Collaborative on Childhood Obesity 
Research (NCCOR), 136
National Council on Aging (NCOA), 363
National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES), 6, 362
national health initiatives
community level, 136–137
federal nutrition programs, 136
local level, 137–140
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), 90
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 90
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), 91
National Rural Health Association (NRHA), 398
National School Breakfast Program (SBP), 92, 97
National School Lunch Program (NSLP), 92, 97, 
136, 370
naturalized citizens, 238
nature’s template, 415
NCCC. See National Center for Cultural 
Competence
NCDs. See noncommunicable diseases
NCOA. See National Council on Aging
neglected tropical diseases, 347
NEMS. See Nutrition Environment Measures 
Survey
NEMS-S. See Nutrition Environment Measures 
Survey in Stores
neoliberalism, 435
neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS), 353
networking opportunities, 396
neural tube defects, 352


===PAGE 498===
 
Index 
473
NHANES. See National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey
NIH. See National Institutes of Health
9-year Food and Fitness initiative, 152
NIS. See nutrition insecurity
NIST. See National Institute of Standards and 
Technology
nitrogen fi xation, 416
NOAA. See National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration
noncommunicable diseases (NCDs), 228, 348, 444
noncitizens, 238
non-core rural counties, 165
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 229
nonimmigrants, 238
nonmetropolitan counties, 165
nonprofi t community hospitals, 261
NRHA. See National Rural Health Association
NS. See nutrition security
NSLP. See National School Lunch Program
nutrient-dense diet, 359
Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for 
Americans, 5
nutrition assessment tools, 43
Nutrition Environment Measures Survey (NEMS), 
216, 267
Nutrition Environment Measures Survey in Stores 
(NEMS-S), 99, 278
nutrition insecurity (NIS)
determinants, 228
developing countries, 228
global organizations, 229–232
Human Development Index, 228–229
Nutrition Landscape Information System (NLiS), 
243
nutrition security (NS), 227, 228
nutrition status assessment
biomarkers, 53
dietary assessment method, 54
goal of, 52
interviewer-administered, 52
long-term intake, 52
self-administered, 52
self-report data, 52–53
short-term intake, 52
nutrition transition, 444
nutritional epidemiology research
asthma prevalence, Cameroon, 62–63
clinical epidemiology, 49–50
Epi Info, 44
evidence-based programs, 50–51
exposure and disease, 44–45
forensic epidemiology, 46–49
goals, 43
mixed methods research, 60
nutrition status assessment, 51–53
quality reporting and checklists, 60–61
theoretical epidemiology, 50
nutritional value, crops, 447
nutrition-related health issues. See malnutrition
OAA Nutrition Program. See Older Americans Act 
Nutrition Program
obesity, 270–271, 348
Obesity Prevention and Lifestyle (OPAL), 125–129
obesogenic culture, 349
obesogenic food environments, 349
observational data collection methods, 324
observational learning, 73–74
Offi  ce of Management and Budget (OMB), 164, 
165
older adult nutrition
carbohydrates, 359
chronic conditions and disease, 361–362
community-based approaches, 363–364
fat, 359
individual approaches, 362–363
lower socioeconomic status, 361
malnutrition, 362–364
micronutrients, 359
physical factors, 359–360
protein, 359
social factors, 360–361
social isolation, 361
water recommendation, 359
Older Americans Act (OAA) Nutrition Program, 
93
OMB. See Offi  ce of Management and Budget
OPAL. See Obesity Prevention and Lifestyle
open-source sustainability, 449
opinion and perception information, 286
opioid use disorder (OUD), 353
opioid-induced bowel dysfunction, 174
osteoarthritis, 361
osteopenia, 38, 360
OUD. See opioid use disorder
outcome evaluation, 321
overnutrition, 232
body mass index, 349
cancer, 351
cardiovascular disease, 350
cultural competency, 349
defi nition, 344
factors infl uencing, 348–349
maternal and childhood, 351
noncommunicable diseases, 348
overweight and obesity, 349, 350
respiratory disease, 350
type 2 diabetes, 349–350
overweight, 348, 349, 350


===PAGE 499===
474 
Index
PARA. See Physical Activity Resource Assessment
Partnerships for Healthier American Healthy 
Hospital Initiative, 102
Patient Protection and Aff ordable Care Act, 11, 
261
PEDro. See Physiotherapy Evidence Database
PEDs. See potentially excess deaths
perceived barriers, 72
perceived benefi ts, 72
perceived severity, 72
perceived susceptibility, 72
PERT chart. See Program Evaluation and Review 
Technique chart
PHAB. See Public Health Accreditation Board
PHN. See public health nutrition
phosphorus depletion, 416
photovoice, 323
photovoice project, 265–266
Physical Activity Resource Assessment (PARA), 
267
Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro), 60
plate waste, 369
Policy, Systems, and Environmental (PSE) changes, 
78, 138–140
polyface farms, 415
population data, 266, 286
portion size estimation aids (PSEAs), 63
post-consumer waste, 369
potential confounder, 31
potentially excess deaths (PEDs), 173
poverty level, 357
practice-based evidence, 294
practice-informed research, 51
precision agriculture, 450
pre-consumer waste, 368
prescription opioid abuse, 174
pretest–posttest design, questionnaire, 323
primary data, 265
principal investigator, 401
procedural knowledge, 73
process evaluation, 320–321
Processes of Change, 77
process-oriented objectives, 400
profession, 386
professional coalitions, 147
professional development
collaboration and innovation, 396, 400
community nutrition and wellness educator, 405
continuous, 386–387
goal setting, 393–394
grant management strategies, 401–402
grantsmanship, 405–406
leadership development, 396
levels of, 387–388
planning and implementation, 395
profession, 386
professional organizations, 395–399
professionalism, 385–386
self-assessment, 392–393
strategies, 392–395
writing process, 400–401
writing skill development, 402
professionalism, 385–386
program evaluation
CDC framework, 325–326
communication strategies (see health 
communication strategies)
data collection methods, 322–324
defi nition, 319
farm-to-school program, Happy Valley School 
District, 336–337
formative evaluation, 320
HFE pricing initiative, 327–331
impact evaluation, 321
logic models, 321
mHEALTH applications, 334–335
outcome evaluation, 321
process evaluation, 320–321
RE-AIM framework, 326–327
vs. research, 320
Social-Ecological Model, 321–322
Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT) chart, 402
program planning
centralized model of implementation, 305
communication plan, 303
community action plan, 301
community health improvement planning 
template, 299, 300
community resources and collaborations, 
303–304
community tool box action plan template, 301, 
302
decentralized model of implementation, 305
evaluation plan, 303
evidence-based public health, 291–292
evidence-informed programs (see evidence-
informed programs)
Howard County Hometown Health 
Improvement (HHI) Coalition, 307–311
program work plan worksheet, 299, 300
resources, 299
sustainability planning, 303
vacation planning, 286
program work plan worksheet, 300
PROGRESS Plus checklist, 25
promising programs, 293
prospective cohort studies, 34–35
PSE changes. See Policy, Systems, and 
Environmental changes


===PAGE 500===
 
Index 
475
PSEAs. See portion size estimation aids
public health, 23
assessment, 24
equity, 24–25
multidisciplinary teams, 24
policy development, 24
research, 24
Public Health Accreditation Board (PHAB), 260
public health agency accreditation, 261
public health nutrition (PHN)
behavioral aspects (see behavioral aspects)
collaborative grantsmanship, 152
community health assessment (see community 
health assessment)
defi nition, 9–10, 15, 25–26
epidemiology (see epidemiology)
global PHN practice, 6, 7
healthful foods access, urban and rural 
communities, 15–16
Healthy People 2030, 8–9
history, United States, 3–6
leadership development, 14
nutrition-related health issues (see malnutrition)
positions and career settings, 11–13
professional development (see professional 
development)
program evaluation (see program evaluation)
program planning (see program planning)
public health core function, 7
rural health (see rural health)
systems thinking, 149–152
training and workforce, 10–11
urbanization and urban health (see urbanization 
and urban health)
workforce development, 13–14
public health nutritionist, 12, 15
public policy environment, 286
qualitative hierarchy of evidence, 57–59
quantitative data collection methods, 57
questionnaires, 323
RALA. See Rural Active Living Assessment
reauthorization process, 93
recall bias, 36
reciprocal determinism, 74
recycling, 424
refugees, 237–239
relative risk, 29
remittance, 243
Renaissance Movement, 55–57
renewable energy, 418
request for proposal (RFP), 400
Research-Tested Intervention Programs (RTIPs), 
296
resettlement, 227
resilience, 168, 413, 414, 420, 424
respiratory disease, 350, 361–362
Retail Food Environment Index (RFEI), 101
retrospective cohort study, 33–34
rewards-based incentive programs, 369
RFEI. See Retail Food Environment Index
RFP. See request for proposal
RHCs. See Rural Health Clinics
RHNPM. See Rural Health Nutrition Practice 
Model
rickets, 27, 352
Right to Food, 364
rights of nature, 422–423
risk ratio (RR), 29
RTIPs. See Research-Tested Intervention Programs
RUCA codes. See Rural–Urban Commuting Area 
codes
RUCCs. See Rural–Urban Continuum Codes
Rural Active Living Assessment (RALA), 278
rural assets map, 169
rural health
case study, 185–186
cultural competence, 179–180
defi nition, 164–167
food security, 174–176
health professionals, 176–179
interprofessional approach, 180–183
mortality, 172–173
sociocultural factors, 163
substance abuse, 173–174
in United States, 164
vs. urban health environment, 167–171
Rural Health Clinics (RHCs), 177, 178
Rural Health Nutrition Practice Model (RHNPM)
access and resources, 181
Appalachian population, 182
health behaviors, 181
information-gathering and organizing process, 
181–182
interprofessional framework, 180
interprofessional involvement, 183
resources and organizations, 183
sociocultural characteristics, 181
traditional foods, 181
rural healthcare, 170
rural populations, 163
rurality, 164
Rural–Urban Commuting Area (RUCA) codes, 
166–167
Rural–Urban Continuum Codes (RUCCs), 166
SAD. See standard American diet
Safe Routes to Schools program, 298
San Diego Food System Alliance, 219


===PAGE 501===
476 
Index
Satterfi eld model, 55, 56
SBP. See National School Breakfast Program
School Breakfast Program, 136
School Breakfast Program (SBP), 370
School Nutrition Association (SNA), 398
script, 179
SCT. See Social Cognitive Th eory
SDOH. See social determinants of health
secondary data, 265
selection bias, 36
self-administered (direct measure) nutrition 
assessments, 52
self-assessment, 392–393
self-effi  cacy, 72
self-report data, 52–53
self-select Fresh Market model, 185
SEM. See Social-Ecological Model
Senior Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program 
(SFMNP), 92, 136
SFMNP. See Senior Farmers’ Market Nutrition 
Program
SFSP. See Summer Food Service Program
Sheppard-Towner Act, 4
short-term intake assessments, 52
SHOWeD method, 323
SIDS. See sudden infant death syndrome
sleep deprivation, 356
SMART objective. See Specifi c, Measurable, 
Achievable, Relevant, Time objective
SNA. See School Nutrition Association
SNAP. See Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program
SNAP-Ed. See Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program Education
SNEB. See Society for Nutrition Education and 
Behavior
SOC. See Stages of Change
Social Cognitive Th eory (SCT), 71, 73–74
competencies and skills, 73
evaluative standards, 73
expectancies and beliefs, 73
observational learning, 73–74
personal goals, 73
reciprocal determinism, 74
social determinants of health (SDOH), 11, 24–25, 
69, 70, 199, 229
aging, 360
rural health equity, 171
urbanization and urban health, 203–206
social foods, 119
social isolation, 361
social justice, 145
Social Marketing Th eory, 81
social media, 334
social networks, 168
Social Security Act, 4
Social-Ecological Model (SEM), 12, 15, 71, 78, 122, 
145, 321–322
Society for Nutrition Education and Behavior 
(SNEB), 399
Society for Public Health Education (SOPHE), 399
socio-ecological approaches, urban health, 
206–211
soft  food culture, 117
solar-powered ecosystem, 418
SOPHE. See Society for Public Health Education
Special Milk Program, 93, 136
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 
Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), 5, 92, 
97
Specifi c, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, Time 
(SMART) objective, 289
Stages of Change (SOC), 75–77
categories, 76
contemplation stage, 75–76
example, 77
precontemplation stage, 75
Processes of Change, 77
stakeholders, 146
standard American diet (SAD), 348
Strategic Intergovernmental Nutrition Alliance, 10
stratifi cation, 30–31
stress, 356
STRIVE trial, 50
stroke, 361
structural racialization, 452
student health organization, 83
stunting, 232
substance abuse, 173–174
sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 35
Summer Food Service Program (SFSP), 92, 136, 
370
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
(SNAP), 11, 16, 80, 92, 203, 369, 370
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
Education (SNAP-Ed), 296
sustainability
community governance crisis, South Carolina, 
436
defi nition, 414
EAT-Lancet Commission on food, 425, 429, 433
Healthy People 2020 and 2030 framework, 425, 
431
novel partnerships, 434–435
Rwanda’s agricultural and environmental 
strategies, 436–437
sustainable development goals, 425–428, 430
synergy, 424
systems thinking
health promotion interventions, 149


===PAGE 502===
 
Index 
477
marketing programs, 150, 152
natural and human-made systems, 150
nutrition education, 150
TANF. See Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families
Tax Increment Financing (TIF), 211
TB. See tuberculosis
TEFAP. See Th e Emergency Food Assistance 
Program
telehealth strategies, 332, 334
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), 
92
Th e Body Project, 356
Th e Emergency Food Assistance Program 
(TEFAP), 93, 370
Th e Future of Public Health, 5
theoretical epidemiology, 50
Th eory of Planned Behavior (TPB), 70–71
Th eory of Reasoned Action (TRA), 74–76
TIA. See transient ischemic attack
TIF. See Tax Increment Financing
topsoil loss, 414–415
toxic environment, 206
TPB. See Th eory of Planned Behavior
TRA. See Th eory of Reasoned Action
trade liberalization, 419
traditional experimental hierarchy of evidence, 
57, 58
transient ischemic attack (TIA), 361
transparency, 415
triple burden of malnutrition, 444
tuberculosis (TB), 346–347
type 2 diabetes, 270–271, 349–350
UAs. See urbanized areas
UCs. See urban clusters
ugly produce, 446
UICs. See Urban Infl uence Codes
unauthorized aliens, 238
undernutrition
contributing factors, 352
defi nition, 344
infectious and communicable disease, 346–348
malnutriti on, 232
maternal, 354
nutrient defi ciencies, 345–346
prevalence, 344
UNICEF. See United Nations Children’s Fund
unintentional injury potentially excess deaths, 
173
United Kingdom Nutrition Society, 10
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 98, 
229, 230
United States
conference, 3–4
dietary guidance, 5
essential public health services, 5–7
Food and Drug Act, 3
Healthy People 2020 objectives, 5–6, 8–9
modern public health system, 3, 4
programs, 4–5
Social Security Act, 4
urban agriculture initiatives, 211–213
urban clusters (UCs), 165
Urban Infl uence Codes (UICs), 166
urban populations, 164
urbanization and urban health
aff ordability, 203
aff ordable healthy food access, San Diego 
County, 219
community gardens, 213–214
developed countries, 200
food access, 202–203
food deserts, 201–202
food retail and services, 202
gentrifi cation, 201
Greenville County, South Carolina, 216–218
healthy diet, 200–201
social determinants of health, 203–206
socio-ecological approaches, 206–211
type 2 diabetes and obesity, 270–271
urban agriculture initiatives, 211–213
urbanized areas (UAs), 165
U.S. Agriculture Adjustment Act, 368
U.S. Census Bureau (USCB), 164, 165
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), 15–16, 
90, 200, 220
U.S. Department of Agriculture Food and 
Nutrition Service (USDA-FNS), 91–92
U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), 91
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
90
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 90
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), 91
U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), 91
U.S. migration–immigration
acculturation, 239–240
immigrants, 239
Immigration and Nationality Act, 237
internally displaced people, 238
refugees, 237–239
U.S. rural hospital closures, 170
USCB. See U.S. Census Bureau
USDA. See U.S. Department of Agriculture
USDA-FNS. See U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Food and Nutrition Service
VAD. See vitamin A defi ciency
vegetable consumption index, 38


===PAGE 503===
478 
Index
vitamin A defi ciency (VAD), 346, 352, 444
vitamin D defi ciency, 352
wasting, 232
water security, 227, 236
Western pattern diet (WPD), 348
WFP. See World Food Programme
What Works for Health program database, 296
White House Conference on the Care of 
Dependent Children, 3
Wittenoom study, 33
Woodruff  County Health Improvement Coalition, 
278
World Economic Forum, 446
World Food Programme (WFP), 98, 229, 231, 365
World Health Organization (WHO), 7, 98
World Public Health Nutrition Association 
(WPHNA), 388, 399
WPD. See Western pattern diet
WPHNA. See World Public Health Nutrition 
Association
wraparound services, 177
writing skills, 402
zinc defi ciency, 345–346, 352, 444
zoning laws, 99–100
